It is not news that Nathan Milstein is a wizard of the violin . Certainly not in Orchestra Hall where he has played countless recitals , and where Thursday night he celebrated his 20th season with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra , playing the Brahms Concerto with his own slashing , demon-ridden cadenza melting into the high , pale , pure and lovely song with which a violinist unlocks the heart of the music , or forever finds it closed . There was about that song something incandescent , for this Brahms was Milstein at white heat . Not the noblest performance we have heard him play , or the most spacious , or even the most eloquent . Those would be reserved for the orchestra's great nights when the soloist can surpass himself . This time the orchestra gave him some superb support fired by response to his own high mood . But he had in Walter Hendl a willing conductor able only up to a point . That is , when Mr. Milstein thrust straight to the core of the music , sparks flying , bow shredding , violin singing , glittering and sometimes spitting , Mr. Hendl could go along . But Mr. Hendl does not go straight to any point . He flounders and lets music sprawl . There was in the Brahms none of the mysterious and marvelous alchemy by which a great conductor can bring soloist , orchestra and music to ultimate fusion . So we had some dazzling and memorable Milstein , but not great Brahms . The concert opened with another big romantic score , Schumann's Overture to `` Manfred '' , which suffered fate , this time with orchestral thrusts to the Byronic point to keep it afloat . Hindemith's joust with Weber tunes was a considerably more serious misfortune , for it demands transluscent textures , buoyant rhythms , and astringent wit . It got the kind of scrambled , coarsened performance that can happen to best of orchestras when the man with the baton lacks technique and style . Bayreuth next summer The Bayreuth Festival opens July 23 with a new production of `` Tannhaeuser '' staged by Wieland Wagner , who is doing all the operas this time , and conducted by Wolfgang Sawallisch . Sawalisch also conducts `` The Flying Dutch '' , opening July 24 . `` Parsifal '' follows July 25 , with Hans Knappertsbusch conducting , and he also conducts `` Die Meistersinger '' , to be presented Aug. 8 and 12 . The `` Ring '' cycles are July 26 , 27 , 28 and 30 , and Aug. 21 , 22 , 23 and 25 . Rudolf Kempe conducts . No casts are listed , but Lotte Lehmann sent word that the Negro soprano , Grace Bumbry , will sing Venus in `` Tannhaeuser '' . Remember how by a series of booking absurdities Chicago missed seeing the Bolshoi Ballet ? ? Remember how by lack of two big theaters Chicago missed the first visit of the Royal Danish Ballet ? ? Well , now we have two big theaters . But barring a miracle , and don't hold your breath for it , Chicago will not see the Leningrad-Kirov Ballet , which stems from the ballet cradle of the Maryinsky and is one of the great companies of the world . Before you let loose a howl saying we announced its coming , not once but several times , indeed we did . The engagement was supposed to be all set for the big theater in McCormick Place , which Sol Hurok , ballet booker extraordinary , considers the finest house of its kind in the country -- and of course he doesn't weep at the capacity , either . It was all set . Allied Arts Corporation first listed the Chicago dates as Dec. 4 thru 10 . Later the Hurok office made it Dec. 8 thru 17 , a nice , long booking for the full repertory . But if you keep a calendar of events , as we do , you noticed a conflict . Allied Arts had booked Marlene Dietrich into McCormick Place Dec. 8 and 9 . Something had to give . Not La Dietrich . Allied Arts then notified us that the Kirov would cut short its Los Angeles booking , fly here to open Nov. 28 , and close Dec. 2 . Shorter booking , but still a booking . We printed it . A couple of days later a balletomane told me he had telephoned Allied Arts for ticket information and was told `` the newspapers had made a mistake '' . So I started making some calls of my own . These are the results . The Kirov Ballet is firmly booked into the Shrine Auditorium , Los Angeles , Nov. 21 thru Dec. 4 . Not a chance of opening here Nov. 28 -- barring that miracle . Then why not the juicy booking Hurok had held for us ? ? Well , Dietrich won't budge from McCormick Place . Then how about the Civic Opera House ? ? Well , Allied Arts has booked Lena Horne there for a week starting Dec. 4 . Queried about the impasse , Allied Arts said : `` Better cancel the Kirov for the time being . It's all up in the air again '' . So the Kirov will fly back to Russia , minus a Chicago engagement , a serious loss for dance fans -- and for the frustrated bookers , cancellation of one of the richest bookings in the country . Will somebody please reopen the Auditorium ? ? Paintings and drawings by Marie Moore of St. Thomas , Virgin Islands , are shown thru Nov. 5 at the Meadows Gallery , 3211 Ellis Av. , week days , 3 p.m. to 8 p.m. , Sundays 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. , closed Mondays . An exhibition of Evelyn Cibula's paintings will open with a reception Nov. 5 at the Evanston Community center , 828 Davis St. . It will continue all month . Abstractions and semi-abstractions by Everett McNear are being exhibited by the University Gallery of Notre Dame until Nov. 5 . In the line of operatic trades to cushion the budget , the Dallas Civic Opera will use San Francisco's new Leni Bauer-Ecsy production of `` Lucia Di Lammermoor '' this season , returning the favor next season when San Francisco uses the Dallas `` Don Giovanni '' , designed by Franco Zeffirelli . H E. Bates has scribbled a farce called `` Hark , Hark , The Lark '' ! ! It is one of the most entertaining and irresponsible novels of the season . If there is a moral lurking among the shenanigans , it is hard to find . Perhaps the lesson we should take from these pages is that the welfare state in England still allows wild scope for all kinds of rugged eccentrics . Anyway , a number of them meet here in devastating collisions . One is an imperial London stockbroker called Jerebohm . Another is a wily countryman called Larkin , whose blandly boisterous progress has been chronicled , I believe , in earlier volumes of Mr. Bates' comedie humaine . What's up now ? ? Well , Jerebohm and his wife Pinkie have reached the stage of affluence that stirs a longing for the more atrociously expensive rustic simplicities . They want to own a junior-grade castle , or a manor house , or some modest little place where Shakespeare might once have staged a pageant for Great Elizabeth and all her bearded courtiers . They are willing to settle , however , in anything that offers pheasants to shoot at and peasants to work at . And of course Larkin has just the thing they want . Splendor by sorcery It's a horror . The name of it is Gore Court , and it is surrounded by a wasteland that would impress T. S. Eliot . That's not precisely the way Larkin urges them to look at it , though . He conjures herds of deer , and wild birds crowding the air . He suggests that Gore Court embodies all the glories of Tudor splendor . The stained-glass windows may have developed unpremeditated patinas , the paneling may be no more durable than the planks in a political platform . The vast , dungeon kitchens may seem hardly worth using except on occasions when one is faced with a thousand unexpected guests for lunch . Larkin has an answer to all that . The spaciousness of the Tudor cooking areas , for example , will provide needed space for the extra television sets required by modern butlers , cooks and maids . Also , perhaps , table-tennis and other indoor sports to keep them fit and contented . It's a wonder , really , to how much mendacious trouble Larkin puts himself to sell the Jerebohms that preposterous manse . He doesn't really need the immense sum of money ( probably converted from American gold on the London Exchange ) he makes them pay . For Larkin is already wonderfully contented with his lot . He has a glorious wife and many children . When he needs money to buy something like , say , the Rolls-Royce he keeps near his vegetable patch , he takes a flyer in the sale of surplus army supplies . One of those capital-gains ventures , in fact , has saddled him with Gore Court . He is willing to sell it just to get it off his hands . And the Jerebohms are more than willing to buy it . They plan to become county people who know the proper way to terminate a fox's life on earth . First one , then the other If , in Larkin's eyes , they are nothing but Piccadilly farmers , he has as much to learn about them as they have to learn about the ways of truly rural living . Mr. Bates shows us how this mutual education spreads its inevitable havoc . Oneupmanship is practiced by both sides in a total war . First the Larkins are ahead , then the Jerebohms . After Larkin has been persuaded to restock his tangled acres with pheasants , he poaches only what he needs for the nourishment of his family and local callers . One of the local callers , a retired brigadier apparently left over from Kipling's tales of India , does not approve of the way Larkin gets his birds . He doesn't think that potting them from a deck chair on the south side of the house with a quart glass of beer for sustenance is entirely sporting . But the brigadier dines on the birds with relish . It is truly odd and ironic that the most handsome and impressive film yet made from Miguel De Cervantes' `` Don Quixote '' is the brilliant Russian spectacle , done in wide screen and color , which opened yesterday at the Fifty-fifth Street and Sixty-eighth Street Playhouses . More than a beautiful visualization of the illustrious adventures and escapades of the tragi-comic knight-errant and his squire , Sancho Panza , in seventeenth-century Spain , this inevitably abbreviated rendering of the classic satire on chivalry is an affectingly warm and human exposition of character . Nikolai Cherkasov , the Russian actor who has played such heroic roles as Alexander Nevsky and Ivan the Terrible , performs the lanky Don Quixote , and does so with a simple dignity that bridges the inner nobility and the surface absurdity of this poignant man . His addle-brained knight-errant , self-appointed to the ridiculous position in an age when armor had already been relegated to museums and the chivalrous code of knight-errantry had become a joke , is , as Cervantes no doubt intended , a gaunt but gracious symbol of good , moving soberly and sincerely in a world of cynics , hypocrites and rogues . Cherkasov does not caricature him , as some actors have been inclined to do . He treats this deep-eyed , bearded , bony crackpot with tangible affection and respect . Directed by Grigory Kozintsev in a tempo that is studiously slow , he develops a sense of a high tradition shining brightly and passing gravely through an impious world . The complexities of communication have been considerably abetted in this case by appropriately stilted English language that has been excellently dubbed in place of the Russian dialogue . The voices of all the characters , including that of Cherkasov , have richness , roughness or color to conform with the personalities . And the subtleties of the dialogue are most helpfully conveyed . Since Russian was being spoken instead of Spanish , there is no violation of artistry or logic here . Splendid , too , is the performance of Yuri Tolubeyev , one of Russia's leading comedians , as Sancho Panza , the fat , grotesque `` squire '' . Though his character is broader and more comically rounded than the don , he gives it a firmness and toughness -- a sort of peasant dignity -- too . It is really as though the Russians have seen in this character the oftentimes underlying vitality and courage of supposed buffoons . The episode in which Sancho Panza concludes the joke that is played on him when he is facetiously put in command of an `` island '' is one of the best in the film . True , the pattern and flow of the drama have strong literary qualities that are a bit wearisome in the first half , before Don Quixote goes to the duke's court . But strength and poignancy develop thenceforth , and the windmill and deathbed episodes gather the threads of realization of the wonderfulness of the old boy . There are other good representations of peasants and people of the court by actors who are finely costumed and magnificently photographed in this last of the Russian films to reach this country in the program of joint cultural exchange . Also on the bill at the Fifty-fifth Street is a nice ten-minute color film called `` Sunday In Greenwich Village '' , a tour of the haunts and joints . Television has yet to work out a living arrangement with jazz , which comes to the medium more as an uneasy guest than as a relaxed member of the family . There seems to be an unfortunate assumption that an hour of Chicago-style jazz in prime evening time , for example , could not be justified without the trimmings of a portentous documentary . At least this seemed to be the working hypothesis for `` Chicago And All That Jazz '' , presented on NBC-TV Nov. 26 . The program came out of the NBC Special Projects department , and was slotted in the Du Pont Show Of The Week series . Perhaps Special Projects necessarily thinks along documentary lines . If so , it might be worth while to assign a future jazz show to a different department -- one with enough confidence in the musical material to cut down on the number of performers and give them a little room to display their talents . As a matter of fact , this latter approach has already been tried , and with pleasing results . A few years ago a `` Timex All-Star Jazz Show '' offered a broad range of styles , ranging from Lionel Hampton's big band to the free-wheeling Dukes Of Dixieland . An enthusiastic audience confirmed the `` live '' character of the hour , and provided the interaction between musician and hearer which almost always seems to improve the quality of performance . About that same time John Crosby's TV series on the popular arts proved again that giving jazz ample breathing space is one of the most sensible things a producer can do . In an hour remembered for its almost rudderless movement , a score of jazz luminaries went before the cameras for lengthy periods . The program had been arranged to permit the establishment of a mood of intense concentration on the music . Cameras stared at soloists' faces in extreme closeups , then considerately pulled back for full views of ensemble work . `` Chicago And All That Jazz '' could not be faulted on the choice of artists . Some of the in-person performers were Jack Teagarden , Gene Krupa , Bud Freeman , Pee Wee Russell , Johnny St. Cyr , Joe Sullivan , Red Allen , Lil Armstrong , Blossom Seeley . The jazz buff could hardly ask for more . Furthermore , Garry Moore makes an ideal master of ceremonies . ( He played host at the Timex show already mentioned . ) One of the script's big problems was how to blend pictures and music of the past with live performances by musicians of today . NBC had gathered a lot of historical material which it was eager to share . For example , there was sheet music with the word `` jazz '' in the title , to illustrate how a word of uncertain origin took hold . Samples zoomed into closeup range in regular succession , like telephone poles passing on the highway , while representative music reinforced the mood of the late teens and 1920's . However well chosen and cleverly arranged , such memorabilia unfortunately amounted to more of an interruption than an auxiliary to the evening's main business , which ( considering the talent at hand ) should probably have been the gathering of fresh samples of the Chicago style . Another source of NBC pride was its rare film clip of Bix Beiderbecke , but this view of the great trumpeter flew by so fast that a prolonged wink would have blotted out the entire glimpse . Similarly , in presenting still photographs of early jazz groups , the program allowed no time for a close perusal . `` Chicago And All That Jazz '' may have wound up satisfying neither the confirmed fan nor the inquisitive newcomer . By trying to be both a serious survey of a bygone era and a showcase for today's artists , the program turned out to be a not-quite-perfect example of either . Still , the network's willingness to experiment in this musical field is to be commended , and future essays happily anticipated . Even Joan Sutherland may not have anticipated the tremendous reception she received from the Metropolitan Opera audience attending her debut as Lucia in Donizetti's `` Lucia Di Lammermoor '' Sunday night . The crowd staged its own mad scene in salvos of cheers and applause and finally a standing ovation as Miss Sutherland took curtain call after curtain call following a fantastic `` Mad Scene '' created on her own and with the help of the composer and the other performers . Her entrance in Scene 2 , Act 1 , brought some disconcerting applause even before she had sung a note . Thereafter the audience waxed applause-happy , but discriminating operagoers reserved judgment as her singing showed signs of strain , her musicianship some questionable procedure and her acting uncomfortable stylization . As she gained composure during the second act , her technical resourcefulness emerged stronger , though she had already revealed a trill almost unprecedented in years of performances of `` Lucia '' . She topped the sextet brilliantly . Each high note had the crowd in ecstasy so that it stopped the show midway in the `` Mad Scene '' , but the real reason was a realization of the extraordinary performance unfolding at the moment . Miss Sutherland appeared almost as another person in this scene : A much more girlish Lucia , a sensational coloratura who ran across stage while singing , and an actress immersed in her role . What followed the outburst brought almost breathless silence as Miss Sutherland revealed her mastery of a voice probably unique among sopranos today . This big , flexible voice with uncommon range has been superbly disciplined . Nervousness at the start must have caused the blemishes of her first scene , or she may warm up slowly . In the fullness of her vocal splendor , however , she could sing the famous scene magnificently . Technically it was fascinating , aurally spell-binding , and dramatically quite realistic . Many years have passed since a Metropolitan audience heard anything comparable . Her debut over , perhaps the earlier scenes will emerge equally fine . The performance also marked the debut of a most promising young conductor , Silvio Varviso . He injected more vitality into the score than it has revealed in many years . He may respect too much the Italian tradition of letting singers hold on to their notes , but to restrain them in a singers' opera may be quite difficult . Richard Tucker sang Edgardo in glorious voice . His bel canto style gave the performance a special distinction . The remainder of the cast fulfilled its assignments no more than satisfactorily just as the old production and limited stage direction proved only serviceable . Miss Sutherland first sang Lucia at Covent Garden in 1959 . ( The first Metropolitan Opera broadcast on Dec. 9 will introduce her as Lucia . ) She has since turned to Bellini , whose opera `` Beatrice Di Tenda '' in a concert version with the American Opera Society introduced her to New York last season . She will sing `` La Sonambula '' with it here next week . Anyone for musical Ping-pong ? ? It's really quite fun -- as long as you like games . You will need a stereo music system , with speakers preferably placed at least seven or eight feet apart , and one or more of the new London `` Phase 4 '' records . There are 12 of these to choose from , all of them of popular music except for the star release , Pass In Review ( SP-44001 ) . This features the marching songs of several nations , recorded as though the various national bands were marching by your reviewing stand . Complete with crowd effects , interruptions by jet planes , and sundry other touches of realism , this disc displays London's new technique to the best effect . All of the jackets carry a fairly technical and detailed explanation of this new recording program . No reference is made to the possibility of recording other than popular music in this manner , and it would not seem to lend itself well to serious music . Directionality is greatly exaggerated most of the time ; ; but when the sounds of the two speakers are allowed to mix , there is excellent depth and dimension to the music . You definitely hear some of the instruments close up and others farther back , with the difference in placement apparently more distinct than would result from the nearer instruments merely being louder than the ones farther back . This is a characteristic of good stereo recording and one of its tremendous advantages over monaural sound . London explains that the very distinct directional effect in the Phase 4 series is due in large part to their novel methods of microphoning and recording the music on a number of separate tape channels . These are then mixed by their sound engineers with the active co-operation of the musical staff and combined into the final two channels which are impressed on the record . In some of the numbers the instrumental parts have even been recorded at different times and then later combined on the master tape to produce special effects . Some clue to the character of London's approach in these discs may be gained immediately from the fact that ten of the 12 titles include the word `` percussion '' or `` percussive '' . Drums , xylophones , castanets , and other percussive instruments are reproduced remarkably well . Only too often , however , you have the feeling that you are sitting in a room with some of the instruments lined up on one wall to your left and others facing them on the wall to your right . They are definitely in the same room with you , but your head starts to swing as though you were sitting on the very edge of a tennis court watching a spirited volley . The Percussive Twenties ( SP-44006 ) stirs pleasant memories with well-known songs of that day , and Johnny Keating's Kombo gives forth with tingling jazz in Percussive Moods ( SP-44005 ) . Big Band Percussion ( SP-44002 ) seemed one of the least attractive discs -- the arrangements just didn't have so much character as the others . There is an extraordinary sense of presence in all of these recordings , apparently obtained at least in part by emphasizing the middle and high frequencies . The penalty for this is noticeable in the big , bold , brilliant , but brassy piano sounds in Melody And Percussion For Two Pianos ( SP-44007 ) . All of the releases , however , are recorded at a gratifyingly high level , with resultant masking of any surface noise . Pass In Review practically guarantees enjoyment , and is a dramatic demonstration of the potentialities of any stereo music system . Many Hollywood films manage somehow to be authentic , but not realistic . Strange , but true -- authenticity and realism often aren't related at all . Almost every film bearing the imprimatur of Hollywood is physically authentic -- in fact , impeccably so . In any given period piece the costumes , bric-a-brac , vehicles , and decor , bear the stamp of unimpeachable authenticity . The major studios maintain a cadre of film librarians and research specialists who look to this matter . During the making recently of an important Biblical film , some 40 volumes of research material and sketches not only of costumes and interiors , but of architectural developments , sports arenas , vehicles , and other paraphernalia were compiled , consulted , and complied with . But , alas , the authenticity seems to stop at the set's edge . The drama itself -- and this seems to be lavishly true of Biblical drama -- often has hardly any relationship with authenticity at all . The storyline , in sort , is wildly unrealistic . Thus , in `` The Story Of Ruth '' we have Ruth , Naomi , and Boaz and sets that are meticulously authentic . But except for a vague adherence to the basic storyline -- i.e. , that Ruth remained with Naomi and finally wound up with Boaz -- the film version has little to do with the Bible . And in the new `` King Of Kings '' the plot involves intrigues and twists and turns that cannot be traced to the Gospels . Earlier this month Edward R. Murrow , director of the United States Information Agency , came to Hollywood and had dinner with more than 100 leaders of the motion picture industry . He talked about unauthentic storylines too . He intimated that they weren't doing the country much good in the Cold War . And to an industry that prides itself on authenticity , he urged greater realism . `` In many corners of the globe '' , he said , `` the major source of impressions about this country are in the movies they meet . Would we want a future-day Gibbon or Macaulay recounting the saga of America with movies as his prime source of knowledge ? ? Yet for much of the globe , Hollywood is just that -- prime , if not sole , source of knowledge . If a man totally ignorant of America were to judge our land and its civilization based on Hollywood alone , what conclusions do you think he might come to ? ? Francois D'Albert , Hungarian-born violinist who made his New York debut three years ago , played a return engagement last night in Judson Hall . He is now president of the Chicago Conservatory College . His pianist was Donald Jenni , a faculty member at DePaul University . The acoustics of the small hall had been misgauged by the artists , so that for the first half of the program , when the piano was partially open , Mr. Jenni's playing was too loud . In vying with him , Mr. D'Albert also seemed to be overdriving his tone . This was not an overriding drawback to enjoyment of the performances , however , except in the case of the opening work , Mozart's Sonata in A ( K. 526 ) , which clattered along noisily in an unrelieved fashion . Brahm's Sonata in A , although also vigorous , stood up well under the two artists' strong , large-scale treatment . Mr. D'Albert has a firm , attractive tone , which eschews an overly sweet vibrato . He made the most of the long Brahmsian phrases , and by the directness and drive of his playing gave the work a handsome performance . A Sonata For Violin And Piano , called `` Bella Bella '' , by Robert Fleming , was given its first United States performance . The title refers to the nickname given his wife by the composer , who is also a member of the National Film Board of Canada . The work's two movements , one melodically sentimental , the other brightly capricious , are clever enough in a Ravel-like style , but they rehash a wornout idiom . They might well indicate conjugal felicity , but in musical terms that smack of Hollywood . Works by Dohnanyi , Hubay , Mr. D'Albert himself and Paganini , indicated that the violinist had some virtuoso fireworks up his sleeve as well as a reserved attitude toward a lyric phrase . Standard items by Sarasate and Saint-Saens completed the program . In recent years Anna Xydis has played with the New York Philharmonic and at Lewisohn Stadium , but her program last night at Town Hall was the Greek-born pianist's first New York recital since 1948 . Miss Xydis has a natural affinity for the keyboard , and in the twenty years since her debut here she has gained the authority and inner assurance that lead to audience control . And the tone she commands is always beautiful in sound . Since she also has considerable technical virtuosity and a feeling for music in the romantic tradition , Miss Xydis gave her listeners a good deal of pleasure . She played with style and a touch of the grand manner , and every piece she performed was especially effective in its closing measures . The second half of her program was devoted to Russian composers of this century . It was in them that Miss Xydis was at her best . The Rachmaninoff Prelude No. 12 , Op. 32 , for instance , gave her an opportunity to exploit one of her special facilities -- the ability to produce fine deep-sounding bass tones while contrasting them simultaneously with fine silver filagree in the treble . The four Kabalevsky Preludes were also assured , rich in color and songful . And the Prokofieff Seventh Sonata had the combination of romanticism and modern bravura that Prokofieff needs . Miss Xydis' earlier selections were Mendelssohn's Variations Serieuses , in which each variation was nicely set off from the others ; ; Haydn's Sonata in E minor , which was unfailingly pleasant in sound , and Chopin's Sonata in B flat minor . A memory lapse in the last somewhat marred the pianist's performance . So , what was the deepest music on her program had the poorest showing . Miss Xydis was best when she did not need to be too probing . All the generals who held important commands in World War 2 , did not write books . It only seems as if they did . And the best books by generals were not necessarily the first ones written . One of the very best is only now published in this country , five years after its first publication in England . It is `` Defeat Into Victory '' , by Field Marshal Viscount Slim . A long book heavily weighted with military technicalities , in this edition it is neither so long nor so technical as it was originally . Field Marshal Slim has abridged it for the benefit of `` those who , finding not so great an attraction in accounts of military moves and counter-moves , are more interested in men and their reactions to stress , hardship and danger '' . The man whose reactions and conclusions get the most space is , of course , the Field Marshal himself . William Joseph Slim , First Viscount Slim , former Governor General of Australia , was the principal British commander in the field during the Burma War . He had been a corps commander during the disastrous defeat and retreat of 1942 when the ill-prepared , ill-equipped British forces `` were outmaneuvered , outfought and outgeneraled '' . He returned in command of an international army of Gurkhas , Indians , Africans , Chinese and British . And in a series of bitterly fought battles in the jungles and hills and along the great rivers of Burma he waged one of the most brilliant campaigns of the war . `` The Forgotten War '' his soldiers called the Burma fighting because the war in Africa and Europe enjoyed priorities in equipment and in headlines . Parts of `` Defeat Into Victory '' are a tangle of Burmese place names and military units , but a little application makes everything clear enough . On the whole this is an interesting and exceptionally well-written book . Field Marshal Slim is striking in description , amusing in many anecdotes . He has a pleasant sense of humor and is modest enough to admit mistakes and even `` a cardinal error '' . He praises many individuals generously . He himself seems to be tough , tireless , able and intelligent , more intellectual and self-critical than most soldiers . Remaking an army to win `` Defeat Into Victory '' is a dramatic and lively military narrative . But it is most interesting in its account of the unending problems of high command , of decisions and their reasons , of the myriad matters that demand attention in addition to battle action . Before he could return to Burma , Field Marshal Slim had to rally the defeated remnants of a discouraged army and unite them with fresh recruits . His remarks about training , discipline , morale , leadership and command are enlightening . He believed in making inspiring speeches and he made a great many . He believed in being seen near the front lines and he was there . For general morale reasons and to encourage the efforts of his supply officers , when food was short for combat troops he cut the rations of his headquarters staff accordingly . Other crucial matters required constant supervision : labor and all noncombatant troops , whose morale was vital , too ; ; administrative organization and delicate diplomatic relations with Top Brass -- British , American and Chinese ; ; health , hygiene , medical aid and preventive medicine ; ; hospitals ( inadequate ) and nurses ( scanty ) ; ; food and military supplies ; ; logistics and transport ; ; airdrops and airstrips ; ; roads and river barges to be built . Expected of a commander Commenting on these and other matters , Field Marshal Slim makes many frank and provocative remarks : `` When in doubt as to two courses of action , a general should choose the bolder '' . `` The commander has failed in his duty if he has not won victory -- for that is his duty '' . `` It only does harm to talk to troops about new and desirable equipment which others may have but which you cannot give them . It depresses them . So I made no mention of air transport until we could get at least some of it '' . Field Marshal Slim is more impressed by the courage of Japanese soldiers than he is by the ability of their commanders . Of the Japanese private he says : `` He fought and marched till he died . If 500 Japanese were ordered to hold a position , we had to kill 495 before it was ours -- and then the last five killed themselves '' . Brooding about future wars , the Field Marshal has this to say : `` The Asian fighting man is at least equally brave ( as the white ) , usually more careless of death , less encumbered by mental doubts , less troubled by humanitarian sentiment , and not so moved by slaughter and mutilation around him . He is , by background and living standards , better fitted to endure hardship uncomplainingly , to demand less in the way of subsistence or comfort , and to look after himself when thrown on his own resources '' . A bunch of young buckaroos from out West , who go by the name of Texas Boys Choir , loped into Town Hall last night and succeeded in corralling the hearts of a sizable audience . Actually , the program they sang was at least two-thirds serious and high-minded , and they sang it beautifully . Under the capable direction of the choir's founder , Geroge Bragg , the twenty-six boys made some lovely sounds in an opening group of Renaissance and Baroque madrigals and motets , excerpts from Pergolesi's `` Stabat Mater '' and all of the Britten `` Ceremonial Of Carols '' . Their singing was well-balanced , clear and , within obvious limitations , extremely pleasing . The limitations are those one expects from untrained and unsettled voices -- an occasional shrillness of almost earsplitting intensity , an occasional waver and now and then a bleat . But Mr. Bragg is a remarkably gifted conductor , and the results he has produced with his boys are generally superior . Most surprising of all , he has accomplished some prodigies in training for the production of words . The Latin , for example , was not only clear ; ; it was even beautiful . Furthermore , there were solid musical virtues in the interpretation of the music . Lines came out neatly and in good balance . Tempos were lively . The piano accompaniments by Istvan Szelenyi were stylish . A boy soprano named Dixon Boyd sang a Durante solo motet and a few other passages enchantingly . Other capable soloists included David Clifton , Joseph Schockler and Pat Thompson . The final group included folk songs from back home , stomped out , shouted and chanted with irresistible spirit and in cowboy costume . Boys will be boys , and Texans will be Texans . The combination proved quite irresistible last night . The Polish song and dance company called Mazowsze , after the region of Poland , where it has its headquarters , opened a three-week engagement at the City Center last night . A thoroughly ingratiating company it is , and when the final curtain falls you may suddenly realize that you have been sitting with a broad grin on your face all evening . Not that it is all funny , by any means , though some of it is definitely so , but simply that the dancers are young and handsome , high-spirited and communicative , and the program itself is as vivacious as it is varied . There is no use at all in trying to follow it dance by dance and title by title , for it has a kind of nonstop format , and moves along in an admirable continuity that demands no pauses for identification . The material is all basically of folk origin , gleaned from every section of Poland . But under the direction of Mira Ziminska-Sygietynska , who with her late husband founded the organization in 1948 , it has all been put into theatrical form , treated selectively , choreographed specifically for presentation to spectators , and performed altogether professionally . Under the surface of the wide range of folk movements is apparent a sound technical ballet training , and an equally professional sense of performing . Since the organization was created thirteen years ago , it is obvious that this is not the original company ; ; it is more likely the sons and daughters of that company . The girls are charming children and the men are wonderfully vital and engaging youngsters . The stage is constantly full of them ; ; indeed , there are never fewer than eight of them on stage , and that is only for the more intimate numbers . They can be exuberant or sentimental , flirtatious or funny , but the only thing they seem unable to be is dull . To pick out particular numbers is something of a problem , but one or two identifiable items are too conspicuously excellent to be missed . There is , for example , a stunning Krakowiak that closes the first act ; ; the mazurka choreographed by Witold Zapala to music from Moniuszko's opera , `` Strasny Dwor' , may be the most beautiful mazurka you are likely ever to see ; ; there is an enchanting polonaise ; ; and the dances and songs from the Tatras contain a magnificent dance for the men . Everywhere there are little touches of humor , and the leader of the on-stage band of musicians is an ebullient comedian who plays all sorts of odd instruments with winning warmth . The Theatre-by-the-Sea , Matunuck , presents `` King Of Hearts '' by Jean Kerr and Eleanor Brooke . Directed by Michael Murray ; ; settings by William David Roberts . The cast : Producer John Holmes has chosen a delightful comedy for his season's opener at Matunuck in Jean Kerr's `` King Of Hearts '' . The dialogue is sharp , witty and candid -- typical `` don't eat the daisies '' material -- which has stamped the author throughout her books and plays , and it was obvious that the Theatre-by-the-Sea audience liked it . The story is of a famous strip cartoonist , an arty individual , whose specialty is the American boy and who adopts a 10-year-old to provide him with fresh idea material . This is when his troubles begin , not to mention a fledgling artist who he hires , and who turns out to have ideas of his own , with particular respect to the hero's sweetheart-secretary . John Heffernan , playing Larry Larkin , the cartoonist , carries the show in marvelous fashion . His portrayal of an edgy head-in-the-clouds artist is virtually flawless . This may be unfortunate , perhaps , from the standpoint of David Hedison , Providence's contribution to Hollywood , who is appearing by special arrangement with 20th Century-Fox . Not that Mr. Hedison does not make the most of his role . He does , and more . But the book is written around a somewhat dizzy cartoonist , and it has to be that way . A word should be said for Gary Morgan , a Broadway youngster who , as the adopted son , makes life miserable for nearly everybody and Larkin in particular . And for his playmate , Francis Coletta of West Warwick , who has a bit part , Billy . On the whole , audiences will like this performance . It is a tremendous book , lively , constantly moving , and the Matunuck cast does well by it . The Newport Playhouse presents `` Epitaph For George Dillon '' by John Osborne and Anthony Creighton , directed by Wallace Gray . The cast : The angriest young man in Newport last night was at the Playhouse , where `` Epitaph For George Dillon '' opened as the jazz festival closed . For the hero of this work by John Osborne and Anthony Creighton is a chap embittered by more than the lack of beer during a jam session . He's mad at a world he did not make . Furthermore , he's something of a scoundrel , an artist whose mind and feelings are all finger-tips . This is in contrast to the family with whom he boards . They not only think and feel cliches but live cliches as well . It is into this household , one eroded by irritations that have tortured the souls out of its people , that George Dillon enters at the beginning of the play . An unsuccessful playwright and actor , he has faith only in himself and in a talent he is not sure exists . By the end of the third act , the artist is dead but the body lingers on , a shell among other shells . Not altogether a successful play , `` Epitaph For George Dillon '' overcomes through sheer vitality and power what in a lesser work might be crippling . It is awfully talky , for instance , and not all of the talk is terribly impressive . But it strikes sparks on occasion and their light causes all else to be forgotten . There is a fine second act , as an example , one in which Samuel Groom , as Dillon , has an opportunity to blaze away in one impassioned passage after another . This is an exciting young actor to watch . Just as exciting but in a more technically proficient way is Laura Stuart , whose complete control of her every movement is lovely to watch . Miss Stuart is as intensely vibrant as one could wish , almost an icy shriek threatening to explode at any moment . Also fine are Sue Lawless , as a mother more protective and belligerent than a female spider and just as destructive , Harold Cherry , as her scratchy spouse , and Hildy Weissman , as a vegetable in human form . Wallace Gray has directed a difficult play here , usually well , but with just a bit too much physical movement in the first act for my taste . Still , his finale is put together with taste and a most sensitive projection of that pale sustenance , despair . The Warwick Musical Theater presents `` Where's Charley ? ? '' With music and lyrics by Frank Loesser , directed by Christopher Hewett , choreography by Peter Conlow , musical direction by Samuel Matlowsky . The cast : Everybody fell in love with Amy again last night at the Warwick Musical Theater , and Shelley Berman was to blame . One of the finest soft shoe tunes ever invented , `` Once In Love With Amy '' is also , of course , one of the most tantalizingly persistent of light love lyrics to come out of American musical comedy in our era . So the audience last night was all ears and eyes just after Act 2 , got a rousing opening chorus , `` Where's Charley ? ? '' , and Berman sifted out all alone on the stage with the ambling chords and beat of the song just whispering into being . It is greatly to Berman's credit that he made no attempt to outdo Ray Bolger . He dropped his earlier and delightful hamming , which is about the only way to handle the old war horse called `` Charley's Aunt '' , and let himself go with as appealing an `` Amy '' as anybody could ask . In brief , Berman played himself and not Bolger . The big audience started applauding even before he had finished . The whole production this week is fresh and lively . The costumes are stunning evocations of the voluminous gowns and picture hats of the Gibson Girl days . The ballet work is on the nose , especially in the opening number by `` The New Ashmolean Marching Society and Students' Conservatory Band '' , along with a fiery and sultry Brazilian fantasia later . Berman , whose fame has rested in recent years on his skills as a night club monologist , proved himself very much at home in musical comedy . Sparrow-size Virginia Gibson , with sparkling blue eyes and a cheerful smile , made a suitably perky Amy , while Melisande Congdon , as the real aunt , was positively monumental in the very best Gibson Girl manner . All told , `` Where's Charley ? ? '' Ought not to be missed . It has a fast pace , excellent music , expert direction , and not only a good comedian , but an appealing person in his own right , Mr. Berman . The Broadway Theater League of Rhode Island presents C. Edwin Knill's and Martin Tahse's production of `` Fiorello ! ! '' At Veterans Memorial Auditorium . The book is by Jerome Weidman and George Abbott , music by Jerry Bock , lyrics by Sheldon Harnick , choreography by Peter Gennaro , scenery , costumes and lighting by William and Jean Eckart , musical direction by Jack Elliott , and the production was directed by Mr. Abbott . The cast : This is one of the happier events of the season . The company which performed the Pulitzer Prize musical here last night and will repeat it twice today is full of bounce , the politicians are in fine voice , the chorines evoke happy memories , and the Little Flower rides to break a lance again . I saw `` Fiorello ! ! '' Performed in New York by the original cast and I think this company is every bit as good , and perhaps better . Certainly in the matter of principals there is nothing lacking . Bob Carroll may not bear quite as close a physical resemblance to LaGuardia as Tom Bosley does , but I was amazed at the way he became more and more Fiorello as the evening progressed , until one had to catch one's self up and remember that this wasn't really LaGuardia come back among us again . Then Rudy Bond was simply grand as Ben , the distraught Republican Party district chieftain . And Paul Lipson , as Morris , the faithful one who never gets home to his Shirley's dinner , was fine , too . As for the ladies , they were full of charm , and sincerity , and deep and abiding affection for this hurrying driving , honest , little man . Charlotte Fairchild was excellent as the loyal Marie , who became the second Mrs. LaGuardia , singing and acting with remarkable conviction . Jen Nelson , as Thea , his first wife , managed to make that short role impressive . And little Zeme North , a Dora with real spirit and verve , was fascinating whether she was singing of her love for Floyd , the cop who becomes sewer commissioner and then is promoted into garbage , or just dancing to display her exuberant feelings . Such fascinating novelties in the score as the fugual treatment of `` On The Side Of The Angels '' and `` Politics And Poker '' were handled splendidly , and I thought Rudy Bond and his band of tuneful ward-heelers made `` Little Tin Box '' even better than it was done by the New York cast ; ; all the words of its clever lyrics came through with perfect clarity . The party at Floyd's penthouse gave the `` chorines '' a chance for a nostalgic frolic through all those hackneyed routines which have become a classic choreographic statement of the era's nonsense . LaGuardia's multi-lingual rallies , when he is running for Congress , are well staged , and wind up in a wild Jewish folk-dance that is really great musical theater . Martin Tahse has established quite a reputation for himself as a successful stager of touring productions . Not a corner has been visibly cut in this one . The sets are remarkably elaborate for a road-show that doesn't pause long in any one place , and they are devised so that they shift with a minimum of interruption or obtrusiveness . ( Several times recently I have wondered whether shows were being staged for the sake of the script or just to entertain the audience with the spectacle of scenery being shifted right in front of their eyes . I'm glad to say there's none of that distraction in this `` Fiorello ! ! '' ) It has all been done in superb style , and the result is a show which deserves the support of every person hereabouts who enjoys good musical theater . Loew's theater presents `` Where The Boys Are '' , an MGM picture produced by Joe Pasternak and directed by Henry Levin from a screenplay by George Wells . The cast : Since the hero , a sterling and upright fellow , is a rich Brown senior , while two Yalies are cast as virtual rapists , I suppose I should disqualify myself from sitting in judgment on `` Where The Boys Are '' , but I shall do nothing of the sort . Instead -- and not just to prove my objectivity -- I hasten to report that it's a highly amusing film which probably does a fairly accurate job of reporting on the Easter vacation shenanigans of collegians down in Fort Lauderdale , and that it seems to come to grips quite honestly with the moral problem that most commonly vexes youngsters in this age group -- that is to say , sex . The answers the girls give struck me as reasonably varied and healthily individual . If most of them weren't exactly specific -- well , that's the way it is in life , I guess . But at least it's reassuring to see some teenagers who don't profess to know all the answers and are thinking about their problems instead . `` Where The Boys Are '' also has a juvenile bounce that makes for a refreshing venture in comedy . There are some sharp and whipping lines and some hilariously funny situations -- the best of the latter being a mass impromptu plunge into a nightclub tank where a `` mermaid '' is performing . Most of the female faces are new , or at least not too familiar . Dolores Hart , is charming in a leading role , and quite believable . I was delighted with Paula Prentiss' comedy performance , which was as fresh and unstilted as one's highest hopes might ask . A couple of the males made good comedy , too -- Jim Hutton and Frank Gorshin . The only performance which was too soft for me was that of Yvette Mimieux , but since someone had to become the victim of despoilers , just to emphasize that such things do happen at these fracases , I suppose this was the attitude the part called for . I must say , however , that I preferred the acting that had something of a biting edge to it . To anyone who remembers Newport at its less than maximum violence , this view of what the boys and girls do in the springtime before they wing north for the Jazz Festival ought to prove entertaining . The second feature , `` The Price Of Silence '' , is a British detective story that will talk your head off . The superb intellectual and spiritual vitality of William James was never more evident than in his letters . Here was a man with an enormous gift for living as well as thinking . To both persons and ideas he brought the same delighted interest , the same open-minded relish for what was unique in each , the same discriminating sensibility and quicksilver intelligence , the same gallantry of judgment . For this latest addition to the Great Letters Series , under the general editorship of Louis Kronenberger , Miss Hardwick has made a selection which admirably displays the variety of James's genius , not to mention the felicities of his style . And how he could write ! ! His famous criticism of brother Henry's `` third style '' is surely as subtly , even elegantly , worded an analysis of the latter's intricate air castles as Henry himself could ever have produced . His letter to his daughter on the pains of growing up is surely as trenchant , forthright , and warmly understanding a piece of advice as ever a grown-up penned to a sensitive child , and with just the right tone of unpatronizing good humor . Most of all , his letters to his philosophic colleagues show a magnanimity as well as an honesty which help to explain Whitehead's reference to James as `` that adorable genius '' . Miss Hardwick speaks of his `` superb gift for intellectual friendship '' , and it is certainly a joy to see the intellectual life lived so free from either academic aridity or passionate dogmatism . This is a virtue of which we have great need in a society where there seems to be an increasing lack of communication -- or even desire for communication -- between differing schools of thought . It holds an equally valuable lesson for a society where the word `` intellectual '' has become a term of opprobrium to millions of well-meaning people who somehow imagine that it must be destructive of the simpler human virtues . To his Harvard colleague , Josiah Royce , whose philosophic position differed radically from his own , James could write , `` Different as our minds are , yours has nourished mine , as no other social influence ever has , and in converse with you I have always felt that my life was being lived importantly '' . Of another colleague , George Santayana , he could write : `` The great event in my life recently has been the reading of Santayana's book . Although I absolutely reject the Platonism of it , I have literally squealed with delight at the imperturbable perfection with which the position is laid down on page after page '' . Writing to his colleague George Herbert Palmer -- `` Glorious old Palmer '' , as he addresses him -- James says that if only the students at Harvard could really understand Royce , Santayana , Palmer , and himself and see that their varying systems are `` so many religions , ways of fronting life , and worth fighting for '' , then Harvard would have a genuine philosophic universe . `` The best condition of it would be an open conflict and rivalry of the diverse systems . The world might ring with the struggle , if we devoted ourselves exclusively to belaboring each other '' . The `` belaboring '' is of course jocular , yet James was not lacking in fundamental seriousness -- unless we measure him by that ultimate seriousness of the great religious leader or thinker who stakes all on his vision of God . To James this vision never quite came , despite his appreciation of it in others . But there is a dignity and even a hint of the inspired prophet in his words to one correspondent : `` You ask what I am going to ' reply ' to Bradley . But why need one reply to everything and everybody ? ? I think that readers generally hate minute polemics and recriminations . All polemic of ours should , I believe , be either very broad statements of contrast , or fine points treated singly , and as far as possible impersonally . As far as the rising generation goes , why not simply express ourselves positively , and trust that the truer view quietly will displace the other . Here again ' God will know his own ' '' . The collected works of James Thurber , now numbering 25 volumes ( including the present exhibit ) represent a high standard of literary excellence , as every schoolboy knows . The primitive-eclogue quality of his drawings , akin to that of graffiti scratched on a cave wall , is equally well known . About all that remains to be said is that the present selection , most of which appeared first in The New Yorker , comprises ( as usual ) a slightly unstrung necklace , held together by little more than a slender thread cunningly inserted in the spine of the book . The one unifying note , if any , is sounded in the initial article entitled : `` How To Get Through The Day '' . It is repeated at intervals in some rather sadly desperate word-games for insomniacs , the hospitalized , and others forced to rely on inner resources , including ( in the P's alone ) `` palindromes '' , `` paraphrases '' , and `` parodies '' . `` The Tyranny Of Trivia '' suggests arbitrary alphabetical associations to induce slumber . And new vistas of hairshirt asceticism are opened by scholarly monographs entitled : `` Friends , Romans , Countrymen , Lend Me Your Ear-Muffs '' , `` Such a Phrase as Drifts Through Dream '' , and `` The New Vocabularianism '' . Some of Thurber's curative methods involve strong potions of mixed metaphor , malapropism , and gobbledygook and are recommended for use only in extreme cases . A burlesque paean entitled : `` Hark The Herald Tribune , Times , And All The Other Angels Sing '' brilliantly succeeds in exaggerating even motion-picture ballyhooey . `` How The Kooks Crumble '' features an amusingly accurate take-off on sneaky announcers who attempt to homogenize radio-TV commercials , and `` The Watchers Of The Night '' is a veritable waking nightmare . A semi-serious literary document entitled `` The Wings Of Henry James '' is noteworthy , if only for a keenly trenchant though little-known comment on the master's difficult later period by modest Owen Wister , author of `` The Virginian '' . James , he remarks in a letter to a friend , `` is attempting the impossible namely , to produce upon the reader , as a painting produces upon the gazer , a number of superimposed , simultaneous impressions . He would like to put several sentences on top of each other so that you could read them all at once , and get all at once , the various shadings and complexities '' . Equally penetrating in its fashion is the following remark by a lady in the course of a literary conversation : `` So much has already been written about everything that you can't find out anything about it '' . Or the mildly epigrammatic utterance ( also a quotation ) : `` Woman's place is in the wrong '' . Who but Thurber can be counted on to glean such nectareous essences ? ? A tribute to midsummer `` bang-sashes '' seems terribly funny , though it would be hard to explain why . `` One of them banged the sash of the window nearest my bed around midnight in July and I leaped out of sleep and out of bed . ' It's just a bat ' , said my wife reassuringly , and I sighed with relief . ' Thank God for that ' , I said ; ; ' I thought it was a human being ' '' . In a sense , perhaps , Thurber is indebted artistically to the surrealist painter ( was it Salvador Dali ? ? ) who first conceived the startling fancy of a picture window in the abdomen . That is , it is literally a picture window : you don't see into the viscera ; ; you see a picture -- trees , or flowers . This is something like what Thurber's best effects are like , if I am not mistaken . Though no longer able to turn out his protoplasmic pen-and-ink sketches ( several old favorites are scattered through the present volume ) Thurber has retained unimpaired his vision of humor as a thing of simple , unaffected humanness . In his concluding paragraph he writes : `` The devoted writer of humor will continue to try to come as close to truth as he can '' . For many readers Thurber comes closer than anyone else in sight . The latest Low is a puzzler . The master's hand has lost none of its craft . He is at his usual best in exposing the shams and self-deceptions of political and diplomatic life in the fifties . The reader meets a few old friends like Blimp and the TUC horse , and becomes better acquainted with new members of the cast of characters like the bomb itself , and civilization in her classic robe watching the nuclear arms race , her hair standing straight out . But there is a difference between the present volume and the early Low . There is fear in the fifties as his title suggests and as his competent drawings show . But there was terror in the thirties when the Nazis were on the loose and in those days Low struck like lightning . Anyone can draw his own conclusions from this difference . It might be argued that the Communists are less inhuman than the Nazis and furnish the artist with drama in a lower key . But this argument cannot be pushed very far because the Communist system makes up for any shortcomings of its leaders in respect to corrosion . The Communists wield a power unknown to Hitler . And the leading issue , that of piecemeal aggression , remains the same . This is drama enough . Do we ourselves offer Mr. Low less of a crusade ? ? In the thirties we would not face our enemy ; ; that was a nightmarish situation and Low was in his element . Now we have stood up to the Communists ; ; we are stronger and more self-confident -- and Low cannot so easily put us to rights . Or does the reason for less Jovian drawings lie elsewhere ? ? It might be that Low has seen too many stupidities and that they do not outrage him now . He writes , `` Confucius held that in times of stress one should take short views -- only up to lunchtime '' . Whatever the cause , his mood in the fifties rarely rises above the level of the capably sardonic . Dulles ? ? He does not seem to have caught the subtleties of the man . McCarthy ? ? The skies turn dark but the clouds do not loose their wrath . Suez ? ? Low seems to have supported Eden at first and then relented because things worked out differently , so there is no fire in his eye . Stalin's death , Churchill's farewell to public life , Hillary and Tensing on Everest , Quemoy and Matsu -- all subjects for a noble anger or an accolade . Instead the cartoons seem to deal with foibles . Their Eisenhower is insubstantial . Did Low decide to let well enough alone when he made his selections ? ? He often drew the bomb . He showed puny men attacked by splendidly tyrannical machines . And Khrushchev turned out to be prime copy for the most witty caricaturist of them all . But , but and but . Look in this book for weak mortals and only on occasion for virtues and vices on the heroic scale . Read the moderately brief text , not for captions , sometimes for tart epigrams , once in a while for an explosion in the middle of your fixed ideas . A gray fox with a patch on one eye -- confidence man , city slicker , lebensraum specialist -- tries to take over Catfish Bend in this third relaxed allegory from Mr. Burman's refreshing Louisiana animal community . The fox is all ingratiating smiles when he arrives from New Orleans , accompanied by one wharf rat . But like all despots , as he builds his following from among the gullible , he grows more threatening toward those who won't follow -- such solid citizens as Doc Raccoon ; ; Judge Black , the vegetarian black snake ; ; and the eagle , who leads the bird community when he is not too busy in Washington posing for fifty-cent pieces . As soon as the fox has taken hold on most of the populace he imports more wharf rats , who , of course , say they are the aggrieved victims of an extermination campaign in the city . ( The followers of bullies invariably are aggrieved about the very things they plan to do to others . ) They train the mink and other animals to fight . And pretty soon gray fox is announcing that he won't have anyone around that's against him , and setting out to break his second territorial treaty with the birds . Robert Hillyer , the poet , writes in his introduction to this brief animal fable that Mr. Burman ought to win a Nobel Prize for the Catfish Bend series . He may have a point in urging that decadent themes be given fewer prizes . But it's hard to imagine Mr. Burman as a Nobel laureate on the basis of these charming but not really momentous fables . In substance they lie somewhere between the Southern dialect animal stories of Joel Chandler Harris ( Uncle Remus ) and the polished , witty fables of James Thurber . George Kennan's account of relations between Russia and the West from the fall of Tsarism to the end of World War 2 , is the finest piece of diplomatic history that has appeared in many years . It combines qualities that are seldom found in one work : Scrupulous scholarship , a fund of personal experience , a sense of drama and characterization and a broad grasp of the era's great historical issues . In short , the book , based largely on lectures delivered at Harvard University , is both reliable and readable ; ; the author possesses an uncommonly fine English style , and he is dealing with subjects of vast importance that are highly topical for our time . If Mr. Kennan is sometimes a little somber in his appraisals , if his analysis of how Western diplomacy met the challenge of an era of great wars and social revolutions is often critical and pessimistic -- well , the record itself is not too encouraging . Mr. Kennan takes careful account of every mitigating circumstance in recalling the historical atmosphere in which mistaken decisions were taken . But he rejects , perhaps a little too sweepingly , the theory that disloyal and pro-Communist influences may have contributed to the policy of appeasing Stalin which persisted until after the end of the war and reached its high point at the Yalta Conference in February , 1945 . After all , Alger Hiss , subsequently convicted of perjury in denying that he gave secret State Department documents to Soviet agents , was at Yalta . And Harry Dexter White , implicated in F.B.I. reports in Communist associations , was one of the architects of the Morgenthau Plan , which had it ever been put into full operation , would have simply handed Germany to Stalin . One item in this unhappy scheme was to have Germany policed exclusively by its continental neighbors , among whom only the Soviet Union possessed real military strength . It is quite probable , however , that stupidity , inexperience and childish adherence to slogans like `` unconditional surrender '' had more to do with the unsatisfactory settlements at the end of the war than treason or sympathy with Communism . Mr. Kennan sums up his judgment of what went wrong this way : dashed hope `` You see , first of all and in a sense as the source of all other ills , the unshakeable American commitment to the principle of unconditional surrender : The tendency to view any war in which we might be involved not as a means of achieving limited objectives in the way of changes in a given status quo , but as a struggle to the death between total virtue and total evil , with the result that the war had absolutely to be fought to the complete destruction of the enemy's power , no matter what disadvantages or complications this might involve for the more distant future '' . Recognizing that there could have been no effective negotiated peace with Hitler , he points out the shocking failure to give support to the anti-Nazi underground , which very nearly eliminated Hitler in 1944 . A veteran diplomat with an extraordinary knowledge of Russian language , history and literature , Kennan recalls how , at the time of Hitler's attack on the Soviet Union in 1941 , he penned a private note to a State Department official , expressing the hope that `` never would we associate ourselves with Russian purposes in the areas of eastern Europe beyond her own boundaries '' . The hope was vain . With justified bitterness the author speaks of `` what seems to me to have been an inexcusable body of ignorance about the nature of the Russian Communist movement , about the history of its diplomacy , about what had happened in the purges , and about what had been going on in Poland and the Baltic States '' . He also speaks of Franklin D. Roosevelt's `` puerile '' assumption that `` if only he ( Stalin ) could be exposed to the persuasive charm of someone like F.D.R. himself , ideological preconceptions would melt and Russia's co-operation with the West could be easily arranged '' . No wonder Khrushchev's first message to President Kennedy was a wistful desire for the return of the `` good old days '' of Roosevelt . This fascinating story begins with a sketch , rich in personal detail , of the glancing mutual impact of World War 1 , and the two instalments of the Russian Revolution . The first of these involved the replacement of the Tsar by a liberal Provisional Government in March , 1917 ; ; the second , the seizure of power by the Bolsheviks ( who later called themselves Communists ) in November of the same year . As Kennan shows , the judgment of the Allied governments about what was happening in Russia was warped by the obsession of defeating Germany . They were blind to the evidence that nothing could keep the Russian people fighting . They attributed everything that went wrong in Russia to German influence and intrigue . This , more than any other factor , led to the fiasco of Allied intervention . As the author very justly says : `` Had a world war not been in progress , there would never , under any conceivable stretch of the imagination , have been an Allied intervention in North Russia '' . The scope and significance of this intervention have been grossly exaggerated by Communist propaganda ; ; here Kennan , operating with precise facts and figures , performs an excellent job of debunking . Plebian dictators Of many passages in the book that exemplify the author's vivid style , the characterizations of the two plebeian dictators whose crimes make those of crowned autocrats pale by comparison may be selected . On Stalin : `` This was a man of incredible criminality , of a criminality effectively without limits ; ; a man apparently foreign to the very experience of love , without mercy or pity ; ; a man in whose entourage none was ever safe ; ; a man whose hand was set against all that could not be useful to him at the moment ; ; a man who was most dangerous of all to those who were his closest collaborators in crime . '' And here is Kennan's image of Hitler , Stalin's temporary collaborator in the subjugation and oppression of weaker peoples , and his later enemy : `` Behind that Charlie Chaplin moustache and that truant lock of hair that always covered his forehead , behind the tirades and the sulky silences , the passionate orations and the occasional dull evasive stare , behind the prejudices , the cynicism , the total amorality of behavior , behind even the tendency to great strategic mistakes , there lay a statesman of no mean qualities : Shrewd , calculating , in many ways realistic , endowed -- like Stalin -- with considerable powers of dissimulation , capable of playing his cards very close to his chest when he so desired , yet bold and resolute in his decisions , and possessing one gift Stalin did not possess : The ability to rouse men to fever pitch of personal devotion and enthusiasm by the power of the spoken word '' . Two criticisms of this generally admirable and fascinating book involve the treatment of wartime diplomacy which is jagged at the edges -- there is no mention of the Potsdam Conference or the Morgenthau Plan . And in a concluding chapter about America's stance in the contemporary world , one senses certain misplacements of emphasis and a failure to come to grips with the baffling riddle of our time : How to deal with a wily and aggressive enemy without appeasement and without war . But one should not ask for everything . Mr. Kennan , who has recently abandoned authorship for a new round of diplomacy as the recently appointed American ambassador to Yugoslavia , is not the only man who finds it easier to portray the past than to prescribe for the future . The story of a quarter of a century of Soviet-Western relations is vitally important , and it is told with the fire of a first-rate historical narrator . The Ireland we usually hear about in the theater is a place of bitter political or domestic unrest , lightened occasionally with flashes of native wit and charm . In `` Donnybrook '' , there is quite a different Eire , a rural land where singing , dancing , fist-fighting and romancing are the thing . There is plenty of violence , to be sure , but it is a nice violence and no one gets killed . By and large , Robert McEnroe's adaptation of Maurice Walsh's film , `` The Quiet Man '' , provides the entertainment it set out to , and we have a lively musical show if not a superlative one . This is the tale of one John Enright , an American who has accidentally killed a man in the prize ring and is now trying to forget about it in a quiet place where he may become a quiet man . But Innesfree , where Ellen Roe Danaher and her bullying brother , Will , live , is no place for a man who will not use his fists . So Enright's courting of the mettlesome Ellen is impeded considerably , thereby providing the tale which is told . You may be sure he marries her in the end and has a fine old knockdown fight with the brother , and that there are plenty of minor scraps along the way to ensure that you understand what the word Donnybrook means . Then there is a matchmaker , one Mikeen Flynn , a role for which Eddie Foy was happily selected . Now there is no reason in the world why a matchmaker in Ireland should happen also to be a talented soft-shoe dancer and gifted improviser of movements of the limbs , torso and neck , except that these talents add immensely to the enjoyment of the play . Mr. Foy is a joy , having learned his dancing by practicing it until he is practically perfect . His matchmaking is , naturally , incidental , and it only serves Flynn right when a determined widow takes him by the ear and leads him off to matrimony . Art Lund , a fine big actor with a great head of blond hair and a good voice , impersonates Enright . Although he is not graced with the subtleties of romantic technique , that's not what an ex-prize fighter is supposed to have , anyway . Joan Fagan , a fiery redhead who can impress you that she has a temper whether she really has one or not , plays Ellen , and sings the role very well , too . If the mettle which Ellen exhibits has a bit of theatrical dross in it , never mind ; ; she fits into the general scheme well enough . Susan Johnson , as the widow , spends the first half of the play running a bar and singing about the unlamented death of her late husband and the second half trying to acquire a new one . She has a good , firm delivery of songs and adds to the solid virtues of the evening . Then there are a pair of old biddies played by Grace Carney and Sibly Bowan who may be right off the shelf of stock Irish characters , but they put such a combination of good will and malevolence into their parts that they're quite entertaining . And in the role of Will Danaher , Philip Bosco roars and sneers sufficiently to intimidate not only one American but the whole British army , if he chose . `` Donnybrook '' is no `` Brigadoon '' , but it does have some very nice romantic background touches and some excellent dancing . The ballads are sweet and sad , and the music generally competent . It sometimes threatens to linger in the memory after the final curtain , and some of it , such as the catchy `` Sez I '' , does . `` A Toast To The Bride '' , sung by Clarence Nordstrom , playing a character called Old Man Toomey , is quite simple , direct and touching . The men of Innesfree are got up authentically in cloth caps and sweaters , and their dancing and singing is fine . So is that of the limber company of lasses who whirl and glide and quickstep under Jack Cole's expert choreographic direction . The male dancers sometimes wear kilts and their performance in them is spirited and stimulating . Rouben Ter-Arutunian , in his stage settings , often uses the scrim curtain behind which Mr. Cole has placed couples or groups who sing and set the mood for the scenes which are to follow . There is no reason why most theatergoers should not have a pretty good time at `` Donnybrook '' , unless they are permanently in the mood of Enright when he sings about how easily he could hate the lovable Irish . We can all breathe more easily this morning -- more easily and joyously , too -- because Joshua Logan has turned the stage show , `` Fanny '' , into a delightful and heart-warming film . The task of taking the raw material of Marcel Pagnol's original trio of French films about people of the waterfront in Marseilles and putting them again on the screen , after their passage through the Broadway musical idiom , was a delicate and perilous one , indeed . More than the fans of Pagnol's old films and of their heroic star , the great Raimu , were looking askance at the project . The fans of the musical were , too . But now the task is completed and the uncertainty resolved with the opening of the English-dialogue picture at the Music Hall yesterday . Whether fan of the Pagnol films or stage show , whether partial to music or not , you can't help but derive joy from this picture if you have a sense of humor and a heart . Some of the New York Philharmonic musicians who live in the suburbs spent yesterday morning digging themselves free from snow . A tiny handful never did make the concert . But , after a fifteen-minute delay , the substantially complete Philharmonic assembled on stage for the afternoon's proceedings . They faced a rather small audience , as quite a few subscribers apparently had decided to forego the pleasures of the afternoon . It was an excellent concert . Paul Paray , rounding out his current stint with the orchestra , is a solid musician , and the Philharmonic plays for him . Their collaboration in the Beethoven Second Symphony was lucid , intelligent and natural sounding . It was not a heavy , ponderous Beethoven . The music sang nicely , sprinted evenly when necessary , was properly accented and balanced . The Franck symphonic poem , `` Psyche '' , is a lush , sweet-sounding affair that was pleasant to encounter once again . Fortunate for the music itself , it is not too frequent a visitor ; ; if it were , its heavily chromatic harmonies would soon become cloying . Mr. Paray resisted the temptation to over-emphasize the melodic elements of the score . He did not let the strings , for instance , weep , whine or get hysterical . His interpretation was a model of refinement and accuracy . And in the Prokofieff C major Piano Concerto , with Zadel Skolovsky as soloist , he was an admirable partner . Mr. Skolovsky's approach to the concerto was bold , sweeping and tonally percussive . He swept through the music with ease , in a non-sentimental and ultra-efficient manner . An impressive technician , Mr. Skolovsky has fine rhythm , to boot . His tone is the weakest part of his equipment ; ; it tends to be hard and colorless . A school of thought has it that those attributes are exactly what this concerto needs . It is , after all , a non-romantic work ( even with the big , juicy melody of the second movement ) ; ; and the composer himself was called the `` age of steel pianist '' . But granted all this , one still would have liked to have heard a little more tonal nuance than Mr. Skolovsky supplied . Taken as a whole , though , it was a strong performance from both pianist and orchestra . Mr. Skolovsky fully deserved the warm reception he received . A new work on the program was Nikolai Lopatnikoff's `` Festival Overture '' , receiving its first New York hearing . This was composed last year as a salute to the automobile industry . It is not program music , though . It runs a little more than ten minutes , is workmanlike , busy , methodical and featureless . `` La Gioconda '' , like it or not , is a singer's opera . And so , of course , it is a fan's opera as well . Snow or no , the fans were present in force at the Metropolitan Opera last night for a performance of the Ponchielli work . So the plot creaks , the sets are decaying , the costumes are pre-historic , the orchestra was sloppy and not very well connected with what the singers were doing . After all , the opera has juicy music to sing and the goodies are well distributed , with no less than six leading parts . One of those parts is that of evil , evil Barnaba , the spy . His wicked deeds were carried on by Anselmo Colzani , who was taking the part for the first time with the company . He has the temperament and the stage presence for a rousing villain and he sang with character and strong tone . What was lacking was a real sense of phrase , the kind of legato singing that would have added a dimension of smoothness to what is , after all , a very oily character . Regina Resnik as Laura and Cesare Siepi as Alvise also were new to the cast , but only with respect to this season ; ; they have both sung these parts here before . Laura is a good role for Miss Resnik , and she gave it force , dramatic color and passion . Mr. Siepi was , as always , a consummate actor ; ; with a few telling strokes he characterized Alvise magnificently . Part of this characterization was , of course , accomplished with the vocal chords . His singing was strong and musical ; ; unfortunately his voice was out of focus and often spread in quality . Eileen Farrell in the title role , Mignon Dunn as La Cieca and Richard Tucker as Enzo were holdovers from earlier performances this season , and all contributed to a vigorous performance . If only they and Fausto Cleva in the pit had got together a bit more . `` Melodious birds sing madrigals '' saith the poet and no better description of the madrigaling of the Deller Consort could be imagined . Their Vanguard album Madrigal Masterpieces ( BG 609 ; ; stereo BGS 5031 ) is a good sample of the special , elegant art of English madrigal singing . It also makes a fine introduction to the international art form with good examples of Italian and English madrigals plus several French `` chansons '' . The English have managed to hold onto their madrigal tradition better than anyone else . The original impulses came to England late ( in the sixteenth century ) and continue strong long after everyone else had gone on to the baroque basso continuo , sonatas , operas and the like . Even after Elizabethan traditions were weakened by the Cromwellian interregnum , the practice of singing together -- choruses , catches and glees -- always flourished . The English never again developed a strong native music that could obliterate the traces of an earlier great age the way , say , the opera in Italy blotted out the Italian madrigal . Early interest Latter-day interest in Elizabethan singing dates well back into the nineteenth century in England , much ahead of similar revivals in other countries . As a result no comparable literature of the period is better known and better studied nor more often performed than the English madrigal . Naturally , Mr. Deller and the other singers in his troupe are most charming and elegant when they are squarely in their tradition and singing music by their countrymen : William Byrd , Thomas Morley and Thomas Tomkins . There is an almost instrumental quality to their singing , with a tendency to lift out important lines and make them lead the musical texture . Both techniques give the music purity and clarity . Claude Jannequin's vocal description of a battle ( the French equivalents of tarantara , rum-tum-tum , and boom-boom-boom are very picturesque ) is lots of fun , and the singers get a sense of grace and shape into other chansons by Jannequin and Lassus . Only with the more sensual , intense and baroque expressions of Marenzio , Monteverdi and Gesualdo does the singing seem a little superficial . Nevertheless , the musicality , accuracy and infectious charm of these performances , excellently reproduced , make it an attractive look-see at the period . The works are presented chronologically . Texts and translations are provided . Elegance and color The elements of elegance and color in Jannequin are strong French characteristics . Baroque instrumental music in Italy and Germany tends to be strong , lively , intense , controlled and quite abstract . In France , it remained always more picturesque , more dancelike , more full of flavor . Couperin and Rameau gave titles to nearly everything they wrote , not in the later sense of `` program music '' but as a kind of nonmusical reference for the close , clear musical forms filled with keen wit and precise utterance . Both composers turn up on new imports from France . BAM is the unlikely name of a French recording company whose full label is Editions De La boite A Musique . They specialize in out-of-the-way items and old French music naturally occupies a good deal of their attention . Sonates et Concerts Royaux of Couperin Le Grand occupy two disks ( LD056 and LD060 ) and reveal the impeccable taste and workmanship of this master -- delicate , flexible and gemlike . The Concerts -- nos. 2 , 6 , 9 , 10 and 14 are represented -- are really closer to chamber suites than to concertos in the Italian sense . The sonatas , `` La Francaise '' , `` La Sultane '' , `` L'Astree '' and `` L'Imperiale '' , are often more elaborately worked out and , in fact , show a strong Italian influence . Couperin also turns up along with some lesser-known contemporaries on a disk called Musique Francaise Du 18e Siecle ( BAM LD 060 ) . Jean-Marie LeClair still is remembered a bit , but Bodin De Beismortier , Corrette and Mondonville are hardly household words . What is interesting about these chamber works here is how they all reveal the aspect of French music that was moving toward the rococo . The Couperin `` La Steinkerque '' , with its battle music , brevity , wit and refined simplicity , already shakes off Corelli and points towards the mid-century elegances that ended the baroque era . If Couperin shows the fashionable trend , the others do so all the more . All these records have close , attractive sound and the performances by a variety of instrumentalists is characteristic . Rameau's Six Concerts En Sextuor , recorded by L'orchestre De Chambre Pierre Menet ( BAM LD 046 ) , turn out to be harpsichord pieces arranged for strings apparently by the composer himself . The strange , delightful little character pieces with their odd and sometimes inexplicable titles are still evocative and gracious . Maitres Allemands Des 17e et 18e Siecles contains music by Pachelbel , Buxtehude , Rosenmueller and Telemann , well performed by the Ensemble Instrumental Sylvie Spycket ( BAM LD 035 ) . Rococo music -- a lot of it -- was played in Carnegie Recital Hall on Saturday night in the first of four concerts being sponsored this season by a new organization known as Globe Concert Arts . Works by J. C. Bach , Anton Craft , Joseph Haydn , Giuseppe Sammartini , Comenico Dragonetti and J. G. Janitsch were performed by seven instrumentalists including Anabel Brieff , flutist , Josef Marx , oboist , and Robert Conant , pianist and harpsichordist . Since rococo music tends to be pretty and elegant above all , it can seem rather vacuous to twentieth-century ears that have grown accustomed to the stress and dissonances of composers from Beethoven to Boulez . Thus there was really an excess of eighteenth-century charm as one of these light-weight pieces followed another on Saturday night . Each might find a useful place in a varied musical program , but taken together they grew quite tiresome . The performances were variable , those of the full ensemble being generally satisfying , some by soloists proving rather trying . Ellie Mao , soprano , and Frederick Fuller , baritone , presented a program of folksongs entitled `` East Meets West '' in Carnegie Recital Hall last night . They were accompanied by Anna Mi Lee , pianist . Selections from fifteen countries were sung as solos and duets in a broad range of languages . Songs from China and Japan were reserved exclusively for Miss Mao , who is a native of China , and those of the British Isles were sung by Mr. Fuller , who is English by birth . This was not a program intended to illustrate authentic folk styles . On the contrary , Miss Mao and Mr. Fuller chose many of their arrangements from the works of composers such as Mendelssohn , Dvorak , Canteloube , Copland and Britten . There was , therefore , more musical substance in the concert than might have been the case otherwise . The performances were assured , communicative and pleasingly informal . What was omitted from `` A Neglected Education '' were those essentials known as `` the facts of life '' . Chabrier's little one-act operetta , presented yesterday afternoon at Town Hall , is a fragile , precious little piece , very French , not without wit and charm . The poor uneducated newlywed , a certain Gontran De Boismassif , has his problems in getting the necessary information . The humor of the situation can be imagined . It all takes place in the eighteenth century . What a silly , artificial way of life , Chabrier and his librettists chuckle . But they wish they could bring it back . Chabrier's delightful music stands just at the point where the classical , rationalist tradition , ( handed down to Chabrier largely in the form of operetta and salon music ) becomes virtually neo-classicism . The musical cleverness and spirit plus a strong sense of taste and measure save a wry little joke from becoming either bawdy or mawkish . The simple , clever production was also able to tread the thin line between those extremes . Arlene Saunders was charming as poor Gontran . Yes , Arlene is her name ; ; the work uses the old eighteenth-century tradition of giving the part of a young inexperienced youth to a soprano . Benita Valente was delightful as the young wife and John Parella was amusing as the tutor who failed to do all his tutoring . The work was presented as the final event in the Town Hall Festival of Music . It was paired with a Darius Milhaud opera , `` The Poor Sailor '' , set to a libretto by Jean Cocteau , a kind of Grand Guignol by the sea , a sailor returns , unrecognized , and gets done in by his wife . With the exception of a few spots , Milhaud's music mostly churns away with his usual collection of ditties , odd harmonies , and lumbering , satiric orchestration . Had a funny experience at Newport yesterday afternoon . Sat there and as a woman sang , she kept getting thinner and thinner , right before my eyes , and the eyes of some 5,500 other people . I make this observation about the lady , Miss Judy Garland , because she brought up the subject herself in telling a story about a British female reporter who flattered her terribly in London recently and then wrote in the paper the next day : `` Judy Garland has arrived in London . She's not chubby . She's not plump . She's fat '' . But who cares , when the lady sings ? ? Certainly not the largest afternoon audience Newport has ever had at a jazz concert and the most attentive and quiet . They applauded every number , not only at its conclusion but also at the first statement of the theme -- sometimes at the first chord . And Judy sang the lovely old familiar things which seemed , at times , a blessed relief from the way-out compositions of the progressive jazzmen who have dominated these proceedings . Things like `` When You're Smiling '' , `` Almost Like Being In Love '' , `` Do It Again '' , `` Born To Wander '' , `` Alone Together '' , `` Who Cares ? ? '' , `` Puttin' On The Ritz '' , `` How Long Has This Been Going On ? ? '' And her own personal songs like `` The Man That Got Away '' , and the inevitable `` Over The Rainbow '' . Miss Garland is not only one of the great singers of our time but she is one of the superb showmen . At the start of her program there were evidences of pique . She had held to the letter of her contract and didn't come onto the stage until well after 4 p.m. , the appointed hour , although the Music at Newport people had tried to get the program underway at 3 . Then there was a bad delay in getting Mort Lindsey's 30-piece orchestra wedged into its chairs . Along about 4:30 , just when it was getting to be about time to turn the audience over and toast them on the other side , Judy came on singing , in a short-skirted blue dress with a blue and white jacket that flapped in the wind . Her bouffant coiffure was fortunately combed on the left which happened to be the direction from which a brisk breeze was blowing . In her first song she waved away one encroaching photographer who dared approach the throne unbidden and thereafter the boys with the cameras had to unsheathe their 300 mm. lenses and shoot at extreme range . There also came a brief contretemps with the sound mixers who made the mistake of being overheard during a quiet moment near the conclusion of `` Do It Again '' , and she made the tart observation that `` I never saw so much moving about in an audience '' . But it didn't take Judy Garland , showman , long to realize that this sort of thing was par for the course at Newport and that you have to learn to live with it . Before her chore was finished she was rescuing wind-blown sheets of music , trundling microphones about the stage , helping to move the piano and otherwise joining in the informal atmosphere . And time after time she really belted out her songs . Sometimes they struck me as horribly over-arranged -- which was the way I felt about her `` Come Rain or Come Shine '' -- and sometimes they were just plain magnificent , like her shatteringly beautiful `` Beautiful Weather '' . To her partisan audience , such picayune haggling would have seemed nothing more than a critic striving to hold his franchise ; ; they just sat back on their haunches and cried for more , as though they could never get enough . They were rewarded with splendid , exciting , singing . Her `` Rockabye Your Baby '' was as good as it can be done , and her really personal songs , like `` The Man That Got Away '' were deeply moving . The audience wouldn't let her leave until it had heard `` Over The Rainbow '' -- although the fellow that kept crying for `` Get Happy '' had to go home unhappy , about that item anyway . She was generous with her encores and the audience was equally so with its cheers and applause and flowers . All went home happy except the Newport police , who feared that the throng departing at 6:35 might meet head-on the night crowd drawing nigh , and those deprived of their happy hour at the cocktail bar . In Newport last night there were flashes of distant lightning in the northern skies . This was perhaps symbolic of the jazz of the evening -- flashes in the distance , but no storm . Several times it came near breaking , and there were in fact some lovely peals of thunder from Jerry Mulligan's big band , which is about as fine an aggregation as has come along in the jazz business since John Hammond found Count Basie working in a Kansas City trap . Mulligan's band has been infected with his solid sense of swing , and what it does seems far more meaningful than most of the noise generated by the big concert aggregations . But what is equally impressive is the delicacy and wonderful lyric quality of both the band and Mulligan's baritone sax in a fragile ballad like Bob Brookmeyer's arrangement of `` Django's Castle '' . For subtle swinging rhythms , I could admire intensely Mulligan's version of `` Weep '' , and the fireworks went on display in `` 18 Carrots For Robert '' , a sax tribute to Johnny Hodges . There was considerable contrast between this Mulligan performance and that of Art Blakey and The Jazz Messengers , who are able to generate a tremendous sound for such a small group . Unfortunately , Blakey doesn't choose to work much of the time in this vein . He prefers to have his soloist performing and thus we get only brief glimpses of what his ensemble work is like . What we did get , however , was impressive . A few drops of rain just before midnight , when Sarah Vaughan was in the midst of her first number , scattered the more timid members of the audience briefly , but at this hour and with Sarah on the stand , most of the listeners didn't care whether they got wet . Miss Vaughan was back in top form , somehow mellowed and improved with the passage of time -- like a fine wine . After the spate of female vocalists we have been having , all of whom took Sarah as a point of departure and then tried to see what they could do that might make her seem old hat , it seemed that all that has happened is to make the real thing seem better than ever . Jazz Three open program The evening program was opened by the Jazz Three , a Newport group consisting of Steve Budieshein on bass , Jack Warner , drums , and Don Cook , piano . This was a continuation of a good idea which was first tried out Saturday night when the Eddie Stack group , also local talent , went on first . Putting on local musicians at this place in the program serves a triple purpose : it saves the top flight jazz men from being wasted in this unenviable spot , when the audience is cold , restless , and in flux ; ; it prevents late-comers from missing some of the people they have come a long way to hear , and it gives the resident musicians a chance to perform before the famous Newport audience . The Jazz Three displayed their sound musicianship , not only in their own chosen set , but as the emergency accompanists for Al Minns & Leon James , the superb jazz dancers who have now been Newport performers for three successive years , gradually moving up from a morning seminar on the evolution of the blues to a spot on the evening program . Julie Wilson sings Julie Wilson , a vigorous vocalist without many wild twists , sang a set , a large part of which consisted of such seldom heard old oldies as `` Hard-Hearted Hannah , The Vamp Of Savannah '' , and the delightful `` Sunday '' . She frosted the cake with the always reliable `` Bill Bailey '' . From this taste of the 1920s , we leaped way out to Stan Getz's private brand of progressive jazz , which did lovely , subtle things for `` Baubles , Bangles And Beads '' , and a couple of ballards . Getz is a difficult musician to categorize . He plays his sax principally for beauty of tone , rather than for scintillating flights of meaningless improvisations , and he has a quiet way of getting back and restating the melody after the improvising is over . In this he is sticking with tradition , however far removed from it he may seem to be . Shearing takes over George Shearing took over with his well disciplined group , a sextet consisting of vibes , guitar , bass , drums , Shearing's piano and a bongo drummer . He met with enthusiastic audience approval , especially when he swung from jazz to Latin American things like the Mambo . Shearing , himself , seemed to me to be playing better piano than in his recent Newport appearances . A very casual , pleasant program -- one of those easy-going things that make Newport's afternoon programs such a relaxing delight -- was held again under sunny skies , hot sun , and a fresh breeze for an audience of at least a couple of thousands who came to Newport to hear music rather than go to the beach . Divided almost equally into two parts , it consisted of `` The Evolution Of The Blues '' , narrated by Jon Hendricks , who had presented it last year at the Monterey , Calif. , Jazz Festival , and an hour-long session of Maynard Ferguson and his orchestra , a blasting big band . Hendricks' story was designed for children and he had a small audience of small children right on stage with him . Tracing the blues from its African roots among the slaves who were brought to this country and the West Indies , he stressed the close relationship between the early jazz forms and the music of the Negro churches . Surprise addition To help him on this religious aspect of primitive jazz he had `` Big '' Miller , as a preacher-singer and Hannah Dean , Gospel-singer , while Oscar Brown Jr. , an extremely talented young man , did a slave auctioneer's call , a field-hands' work song , and a beautifully sung Negro lullaby , `` Brown Baby '' , which was one of the truly moving moments of the festival . One of those delightful surprise additions , which so frequently occur in jazz programs , was an excellent stint at the drums by the great Joe Jones , drumming to `` Old Man River '' , which seems to have been elected the favorite solo for the boys on the batterie at this year's concerts . Demonstrating the primitive African rhythmic backgrounds of the Blues was Michael Babatunde Olatunji , who plays such native drums as the konga and even does a resounding job slapping his own chest . He has been on previous Newport programs and was one of the sensations of last year's afternoon concerts . Hendricks had Billy Mitchell , tenor sax ; ; Pony Poindexter , alto sax ; ; Jimmy Witherspoon , Blues singer ( and a good one ) , and the Ike Isaacs Trio , which has done such wonderful work for two afternoons now , helping him with the musical examples . It all went very well . Pianists who are serious about their work are likely to know the interesting material contained in Schubert's Sonatas . Music lovers who are not familiar with this literature may hear an excellent example , played for RCA by Emil Gilels . He has chosen Sonata Op. 53 in Aj . The playing takes both sides of the disc . Perhaps one of the reasons these Sonatas are not programmed more often is their great length . Rhythmic interest , melodic beauty and the expansiveness of the writing are all qualities which hold one's attention with the Gilels playing . His technique is ample and his musical ideas are projected beautifully . The male chorus of the Robert Shaw Chorale sings Sea Shanties in fine style . The group is superbly trained . What a discussion can ensue when the title of this type of song is in question . Do you say chantey , as if the word were derived from the French word chanter , to sing , or do you say shanty and think of a roughly built cabin , which derives its name from the French-Canadian use of the word chantier , with one of its meanings given as a boat-yard ? ? I say chantey . Either way , the Robert Shaw chorus sings them in fine style with every colorful word and its musical frame spelled out in terms of agreeable listening . If your favorite song is not here it must be an unfamiliar one . The London label offers an operatic recital by Ettore Bastianini , a baritone whose fame is international . Murray Louis and his dance company appeared at the Henry Street Playhouse on Friday and Saturday evenings and Sunday afternoons in the premiere of his latest work , `` Signal '' , and the repetition of an earlier one , `` Journal '' . `` Signal '' is choreographed for three male dancers to an electronic score by Alwin Nikolais . Its abstract decor is by John Hultberg . Program note reads as follows : `` Take hands ; ; this urgent visage beckons us '' . Here , as in `` Journal '' , Mr. Louis has given himself the lion's share of the dancing , and there is no doubt that he is capable of conceiving and executing a wide variety of difficult and arresting physical movements . Indeed , both `` Journal '' and `` Signal '' qualify as instructive catalogues of modern-dance calisthenics . But chains of movements are not necessarily communicative , and it is in the realm of communication that the works prove disappointing . One frequently has the feeling that the order of their movement combinations could be transposed without notable loss of effect , there is too little suggestion of organic relationship and development . It may be , of course , that Mr. Louis is consciously trying to create works that anticipate an age of total automation . But it may be , also , that he is merely more mindful of athletics than of esthetics at the present time . One thing is certain , however , and that is that he is far more slavish to the detailed accents , phrasings and contours of the music he deals with than a confident dance creator need be . ' an American journey ' A brisk , satirical spoof of contemporary American mores entitled `` An American Journey '' was given its first New York performance at Hunter College Playhouse last night by the Helen Tamiris-Daniel Nagrin Dance Company . Choreographed by Mr. Nagrin , the work filled the second half of a program that also offered the first New York showing of Miss Tamiris' `` Once Upon A Time '' as well as her `` Women's Song '' and Mr. Nagrin's `` Indeterminate Figure '' . Eugene Lester assembled a witty and explicit score for `` An American Journey '' , and Malcolm McCormick gave it sprightly imaginative costumes . Mr. Nagrin has described four `` places '' , each with its scenery and people , added two `` diversions '' , and concluded with `` A Toccata for the Young '' , a refreshingly underplayed interpretation of rock'n'roll dancing . The `` places '' could be anywhere , the idiosyncrasies and foibles observed there could be anybody's , and the laugh is on us all . But we need not mind too much , because Mr. Nagrin has expressed it through movement that is diverting and clever almost all the way . Miss Tamiris' `` Once Upon A Time '' is a problem piece about a man and a woman and the three `` figures '' that bother them somehow . Unfortunately , the man and woman were not made to appear very interesting at the outset and the menacing figures failed to make them any more so . Nor did the dancing involved really seize the attention at any time . The music here , Russell Smith's `` Tetrameron '' , sounded good . All the performances of the evening were smooth and assured , and the sizable company , with Mr. Nagrin and Marion Scott as its leading dancers , seemed to be fine shape . The Symphony Of The Air , greatly assisted by Van Cliburn , last night got its seven-concert Beethoven cycle at Carnegie Hall off to a good start . At the same time the orchestra announced that next season it would be giving twenty-five programs at Carnegie , and that it would be taking these concerts to the suburbs , repeating each of them in five different communities . This news , announced by Jerome Toobin , the orchestra's administrative director , brought applause from the 2,800 persons who filled the hall . They showed they were glad that Carnegie would have a major orchestra playing there so often next season to take up the slack with the departure to Lincoln Center of the New York Philharmonic , the Philadelphia Orchestra and the Boston Symphony . This season the orchestra has already taken a step toward the suburbs in that it is giving six subscription concerts for the Orchestral Society of Westchester in the County Center in White Plains . The details of the suburban concerts next season , and the centers in which they will be given , will be announced later , Mr. Toobin said . The concertos that Van Cliburn has been associated with in New York since his triumphant return from Russia in 1958 have been the Tchaikovsky , the Rachmaninoff Third , and the Prokofieff Third . It was pleasant last night , therefore , to hear him do something else : a concerto he has recently recorded , `` The Emperor '' . The young Texas pianist can make great chords ring out as well as anyone , so last night the massive sonorities of this challenging concerto were no hazard to him . But they were not what distinguished his performance . The elements that did were the introspective slow movement , the beautiful transition to the third movement , and the passages of filigree that laced through the bigger moments of the opening movement and the final Rondo . Mr. Cliburn gave the slow movement some of the quality of a Chopin Nocturne . Alfred Wallenstein , the conductor , sensitive accompanist that he is , picked up the idea and led the orchestra here with a sense of brooding , poetic mystery . The collaboration was remarkable , as it was in both the other movements , too . Mr. Wallenstein , who will lead all of the concerts in the cycle , also conducted the `` Leonore '' Overture No. 3 and the Fourth Symphony . The orchestra was obviously on its mettle and it played most responsively . And although there was plenty of vigor in the performance , the ensemble was at its best when the playing was soft and lyrical , yet full of the suppressed tension that is one of the hallmarks of Beethoven . Igor Oistrakh will be the next soloist on Feb. 4 . There are times when one suspects that the songs that are dropped from musical shows before they reach Broadway may really be better than many of those that are left in . Today , in the era of the integrated musical when an individual song must contribute to the over-all development of the show , it is understandable that a song , no matter how excellent it may be on its own terms , is cut out because it does not perform the function required of it . In the more casually constructed musicals of the Nineteen Twenties and Nineteen Thirties there would seem to have been less reason for eliminating a song of merit . Yet there is the classic case of the Gershwins' `` The Man I Love '' . Deemed too static when it was first heard in `` Lady Be Good '' in Philadelphia in 1924 , it was dropped from the score . It was heard again in Philadelphia in 1927 in the first version of `` Strike Up The Band '' and again abandoned shortly before the entire show was given up . It finally reached Broadway in the second and successful version of `` Strike Up The Band '' in 1929 . ( Still another song in `` Strike Up The Band '' -- `` I've Got A Crush On You '' -- was retrieved from a 1928 failure , `` Treasure Girl '' . ) second chance Like the Gershwins , Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart were loath to let a good song get away from them . If one of Mr. Rodgers' melodies seemed to deserve a better fate than interment in Boston or the obscurity of a Broadway failure , Mr. Hart was likely to deck it out with new lyrics to give it a second chance in another show . Several of these double entries have been collected by Ben Bagley and Michael McWhinney , along with Rodgers and Hart songs that disappeared permanently en route to New York and others that reached Broadway but have not become part of the constantly heard Rodgers and Hart repertory , in a delightfully refreshing album , Rodgers And Hart Revisited ( Spruce Records , 505 Fifth Avenue , New York ) . Among the particular gems in this collection is the impudent opening song of `` The Garrick Gaieties '' , an impressive forecast of the wit and melody that were to come from Rodgers and Hart in the years that followed ; ; Dorothy Loudon's raucous listing of the attractions `` At The Roxy Music Hall '' from `` I Married An Angel '' ; ; and the incisive style with which Charlotte Rae delivers the top-drawer Hart lyrics of `` I Blush '' , a song that was cut from `` A Connecticut Yankee '' . Altogether fifteen virtually unknown Rodgers and Hart songs are sung by a quintet of able vocalists . Norman Paris has provided them with extremely effective orchestral accompaniment . Turning to the current musical season on Broadway , the most widely acclaimed of the new arrivals , How To Succeed In Business Without Really Trying , has been transferred to an original cast album ( R. C. A. Victor LOC 1066 ; ; stereo LSO 1066 ) that has some entertaining moments , although it is scarcely as inventive as the praise elicited by the show might lead one to expect . Robert Morse , singing with comically plaintive earnestness , carries most of the burden and is responsible for the high spots in Frank Loesser's score . Rudy Vallee , who shares star billing with Mr. Morse , makes only two appearances . He shares with Mr. Morse a parody of the college anthems he once sang while his second song is whisked away from him by Virginia Martin , a girl with a remarkably expressive yip in her voice . In general , Mr. Loesser has done a more consistent job as lyricist than he has as composer . Like Mr. Loesser , Jerry Herman is both composer and lyriist for Milk And Honey ( R. C. A. Victor LOC 1065 ; ; stereo LSO 1065 ) , but in this case it is the music that stands above the lyrics . For this story of an American couple who meet and fall in love in Israel , Mr. Herman has written songs that are warmly melodious and dance music that sparkles . Resourceful voices There are the full-bodied , resourceful voices of Robert Weede , Mimi Benzell and Tommy Rall to make the most of Mr. Herman's lilting melodies and , for an occasional change of pace , the bright humor of Molly Picon . Mr. Herman has managed to mix musical ideas drawn from Israel and the standard American ballad style in a manner that stresses the basic tunefulness of both idioms . Not content to create only the music and lyrics , Noel Coward also wrote the book and directed Sail Away ( Capitol WAO 1643 ; ; stereo SWAO 1643 ) , a saga of life on a cruise ship that is not apt to be included among Mr. Coward's more memorable works . The melodies flow along pleasantly , as Mr. Coward's songs usually do , but his lyrics have a tired , cut-to-a-familiar-pattern quality . Elaine Stritch , who sings with a persuasively warm huskiness , belts some life into most of her songs , but the other members of the cast sound as lukewarm as Mr. Coward's songs . With three fine Russian films in recent months on World War 2 , -- `` The House I Live In '' , `` The Cranes Are Flying '' and `` Ballad Of A Soldier '' -- we had every right to expect a real Soviet block-buster in `` The Day The War Ended '' . It simply isn't , not by a long shot . The Artkino presentation , with English titles , opened on Saturday at the Cameo Theatre . Make no mistake , this Gorky Studio drama is a respectable import -- aptly grave , carefully written , performed and directed . In describing the initial Allied occupation of a middle-sized German city , the picture has color , pictorial pull and genuinely moving moments . Told strictly from the viewpoint of the Russian conquerors , the film compassionately peers over the shoulders of a smitten Soviet couple , at both sides of the conflict's aftermath . Unfortunately , the whole picture hinges on this romance , at the expense of everything else . Tenderly and rather tediously , the camera rivets on the abrupt , deep love of a pretty nurse and a uniformed teacher , complicated by nothing more than a friend they don't want to hurt . It's the old story , war or no war , and more than one viewer may recall Hollywood's `` Titanic '' , several seasons back , when the paramount concern was for the marital discord of a society dilettante . Not that the picture is superficial . Under Yakov Segal's direction , it begins stirringly , as crouching Soviet and Nazi troops silently scan each other , waiting for the first surrender gesture . One high-up camera shot is magnificent , as the Germans straggle from a cathedral , dotting a huge , cobblestone square , and drop their weapons . Ring Of Bright Water , by Gavin Maxwell . 211 pages . Dutton . A5 . Only once in a very long while comes a book that gives the reader a magic sense of sharing a rare experience . `` Ring Of Bright Water '' by Gavin Maxwell is just that -- a haunting , warmly personal chronicle of a man , an otter , and a remote cottage in the Scottish West Highlands . `` He has married me with a ring of bright water '' , begins the Kathleen Raine poem from which Maxwell takes his title , and it is this mystic bond between the human and natural world that the author conveys . The place is Camusfearna , the site of a long-vanished sea-village opposite the isle of Skye . It is a land of long fjords , few people , a single-lane road miles away -- and of wild stags , Greylag geese , wild swans , dolphins and porpoises playing in the waters . How Maxwell recounts his first coming to Camusfearna , his furnishing the empty house with beach-drift , the subtle changes in season over ten years , is a moving experience . Just the evocations of time and place , of passionate encounter between man and a natural world which today seems almost lost , would be enough . But it isn't . There is Mijbil , an otter who travelled with Maxwell -- and gave Maxwell's name to a new species -- from the Tigris marshes to his London flat . It may sound extravagant to say that there has never been a more engaging animal in all literature . This is not only a compliment to Mijbil , of whom there are a fine series of photographs and drawings in the book , but to the author who has catalogued the saga of a frightened otter cub's journey by plane from Iraq to London , then by train ( where he lay curled in the wash basin playing with the water tap ) to Camusfearna , with affectionate detail . Mij , as his owner was soon to learn , had strange , inexplicable habits . He liked to nip ear lobes of unsuspecting visitors with his needle-sharp teeth . He preferred sleeping in bed with his head on a pillow . Systematically he would open and ransack drawers . Given a small ball or marbles , he would invent games and play by himself for hours . With curiosity and elan , he explored every inch of glen , beach and burn , once stranding himself for hours on a ledge high up a sheer seventy-foot cliff and waiting with calm faith to be rescued by Maxwell , who nearly lost his life in doing so . A year and a day of this idyll is described for the reader , one in which not only discovery of a new world of personality is charted , but self-discovery as well . In the solitude of Camusfearna there had been no loneliness . `` To be quite alone where there are no other human beings is sharply exhilarating ; ; it is as though some pressure had suddenly been lifted , allowing an intense awareness a sharpening of the senses '' . Now , with the increasing interdependence between himself and Mij came a knowledge of an obscure need , that of being trusted implicitly by some creature . Two other people in time shared Mijbil's love : `` it remained around us three that his orb revolved when he was not away in his own imponderable world of wave and water ; ; we were his Trinity , and he behaved towards us with a mixture of trust and abuse , passion and irritation . In turn each of us in our own way depended , as gods do , upon his worship '' . Yet the idyll ended . The brief details of Mijbil's death lend depth to the story , give it an edge of ironic tragedy . Man , to whom Mij gave endless affection and fealty , was responsible in the form of a road worker with a pickaxe who somehow becomes an abstract symbol of the savage in man . But then , through a strange coincidence , Maxwell manages to acquire Idal , a female otter , and the fascinating story starts once more . One is not sure who emerges as the main personality of this book -- Mijbil , with his rollicking ways , or Maxwell himself , poet , portrait painter , writer , journalist , traveller and zoologist , sensitive but never sentimental recorder of an unusual way of life , in a language at once lyrical and forceful , vivid and unabashed . This reviewer read the book when it was first brought out in England with a sense of discovery and excitement . Now Gavin Maxwell's Ring Of Bright Water has widened to enchant the world . New York -- The performances of the Comedie Francaise are the most important recent events in the New York theater . They serve to contradict a popular notion that the Comedie merely repeats , as accurately as possible , the techniques of acting the classics that prevailed in the 17th century . On the contrary , the old plays are continually being reinterpreted , and each new production of a classic has only a brief history at the Comedie . Of course , the well-received revivals last longer than the others , and that further reminds us that the Comedie is not insensitive to criticism . The directors of the Comedie do not respond to adverse notices in as docile and subservient a manner as the Broadway producers who , in two instances this season , closed their plays after one performance . But they are aware of the world outside , they court public approval , they delight in full houses , and they occasionally dare to experiment in interpreting a dramatic classic . In France , novel approaches to the classic French plays are frequently attempted . The government pays a subsidy for revival of the classics , and this policy attracts experimenters who sometimes put Moliere's characters in modern dress and often achieve interesting results . So far as I know , the Comedie has never put Moliere's people in the costumes of the 20th century , but they do reinterpret plays and characters . Last season , the Comedie's two principal experiments came to grief , and , in consequence , we can expect fairly soon to see still newer productions of Racine's `` Phedre '' and Moliere's `` School For Wives '' . The new `` Phedre '' was done in 17th century setting , instead of ancient Greek ; ; perhaps that is the Comedie's equivalent for thrusting this play's characters into our own time . The speaking of the lines seemed excessively slow and stately , possibly in an effort to capture the spirit of 17th century elegance . A few literary men defended what they took to be an emphasis on the poetry at the expense of the drama , but the response was mainly hostile and quite violent . The new `` School For Wives '' was interpreted according to a principle that is becoming increasingly common in the playing of classic comedy -- the idea of turning some obviously ludicrous figure into a tragic character . Among the Moliere specialists of some years ago , Louis Jouvet tried to humanize some of the clowns , while Fernand Ledoux , often performing at the Comedie , made them more gross than Moliere may have intended . Apparently , Jouvet and Ledoux attempted just these dissimilar approaches in the role of Arnolphe in `` The School For Wives '' . I say `` apparently '' although I saw Jouvet as Arnolphe when he visited this country shortly before his death ; ; by that time , he seemed to have dropped the tragic playing of the last moments of the comedy . Arnolphe , it will be recalled , is a man of mature years who tries to preserve the innocence of his youthful wife-to-be . The part can lend itself to serious treatment ; ; one influential French critic remarked : `` Pity for Arnolphe comes with age '' . Accordingly , at the Comedie last year , Jean Meyer played a sympathetic Arnolphe and drew criticism for turning the comedy into a tragedy . But the stuff of tragedy was not truly present and the play became only comedy acted rather slowly . Wisely , the Comedie has brought Moliere's `` Tartuffe '' on its tour and has left `` The School For Wives '' at home . Tartuffe is the religious hypocrite who courts his benefactor's wife . Jouvet played him as a sincere zealot , and Ledoux , at the Comedie , made him a gross buffoon , or so the historians tell us . Louis Seigner , who formerly played the deluded benefactor opposite Ledoux , is the Tartuffe of the present production , which he himself directed . His Tartuffe observes the golden mean . His red face , his coarse gestures , and his lustful stares bespeak his sensuality . But his heavenward glances and his pious speeches are not merely perfunctory ; ; of course , they do not reflect sincerity , but they exhibit a concern to make a good job out of his pious impersonation . Occasionally , Seigner draws some justly deserved laughs by his quick shifts from one personality to another . The whole role , by the way , is a considerable transformation for anyone who has seen Seigner in his other parts . His normal specialty is playing the good-natured old man , frequently stupid or deluded but never mean or sly . Here , he is , quite persuasively , the very embodiment of meanness and slyness . Seigner is the dean of the company , the oldest actor in point of continuous service . In that function , he helps to rebut another legend about the Comedie . We are often told that the Comedie has , unfortunately , life-contracts with old actors who are both mediocre and lazy , drawing their pay without much acting but probably doing real service to the Comedie by staying off the stage . Seigner , however , is a fine actor and probably the busiest man in the company ; ; among his other parts are the leads in `` The Bourgeois Gentleman '' and `` The Imaginary Invalid '' . In Moliere's farce , `` The Tricks Of Scapin '' , Robert Hirsch undertakes another of the great roles . Here some innovation is attempted . To begin with , Scapin is a trickster in the old tradition of the clever servant who plots the strategy of courtship for his master . Hirsch's Scapin is healthy , cheerful , energetic , revelling in his physical agility and his obvious superiority to the young gentlemen whom he serves . Hirsch says that he has given the role certain qualities he has observed in the city toughs of the real world . And surely his Scapin has a fresh directness , a no-nonsense quality that seems to make him his own master and nobody's servant . Django Reinhardt , the ill-fated gypsy , was a true artist , one who demonstrated conclusively the power of art to renew itself and flow into many channels . There is hardly a jazz guitarist in the business today who doesn't owe something to Django . And Django owed much to Louis Armstrong . He told once of how he switched his style of playing to jazz after listening to two old Armstrong records he bought in the Flea Market in Paris . It was the first jazz he had heard . Django , who was born Jean Baptiste Reinhardt in Belgium and who died in 1953 in France , was an extraordinary man . Most of the fingers on his left hand were burned off when he fell asleep with a cigarette . And this was before he began to play his startlingly beautiful jazz . You can catch up with him -- if you haven't already -- on RCA-Victor's album . `` Djangology '' , made up of tracks he recorded with Stephane Grappelly and the Quintet of the Hot Club of France . This is a choice item and Grappely deserves mention too , of course . He is one of the few men in history who plays jazz on a violin . They play : `` Minor Swing '' , `` Honeysuckle Rose '' , `` Beyond The Sea '' , `` Bricktop '' , `` Heavy Artillery '' , `` Djangology '' , `` After You've Gone '' , `` Where Are You , My Love '' ? ? `` I Saw Stars '' , `` Lover Man '' , `` Menilmontant '' and `` Swing 42 '' . All this is great proceedings -- get the minutes . Kid Ory , the trombonist chicken farmer , is also one of the solid anchor points of jazz . He dates back to the days before the first sailing ship pulled into New Orleans . His horn has blown loud and clear across the land for more years than he cares to remember . Good Time Jazz has released a nice two-record album which he made . He is starred against Alvin Alcorn , trumpet ; ; Phil Gomez , clarinet ; ; Cedric Haywood , piano ; ; Julian Davidson , guitar ; ; Wellman Braud , bass , and Minor Hall , drums . The set contains `` High Society '' , `` Do What Ory Say '' , `` Down Home Rag '' , `` Careless Love '' , Jazz Me Blues '' , `` Weary Blues '' , `` Original Dixieland One-Step '' , `` Bourbon Street Parade '' , `` Panama '' , `` Toot , Toot , Tootsie '' , `` Oh Didn't He Ramble '' , `` Beale Street Blues '' , `` Maryland , My Maryland '' , `` 1919 Rag '' , `` Eh , La Bas '' , `` Mood Indigo '' , and `` Bugle Call Rag '' . All this will serve to show off the Ory style in fine fashion and is a must for those who want to collect elements of the old-time jazz before it is too late to lay hands on the gems . Mischa Elman shared last night's Lewisohn Stadium concert with three American composers . His portion of the program -- and a big portion it was -- consisted of half the major nineteenth-century concertos for the violin : to wit , the Mendelssohn and the Tchaikovsky . That is an evening of music-making that would faze many a younger man ; ; Mr. Elman is 70 years old . There were 8,000 persons at the Stadium who can tell their grandchildren that they heard Elman . But , with all due respects and allowances , it must truthfully be said that what they heard was more syrupy than sweet , more mannered than musical . The occasion was sentimental ; ; so was the playing . The American part of the evening consisted of Paul Creston's Dance Overture , William Schuman's `` Chester '' From `` New England Triptych '' and two works of Wallingford Riegger , Dance Rhythms , Op. 58 , and a Romanza For Strings , Op. 56A . The Creston is purely a potboiler , with Spanish , English , French and American dances mixed into the stew . The Riegger , with its Latin hesitation bounce , is just this side of the pale ; ; like his sweet , attractive Romanza , it belongs to what the composer called his `` Non-Dissonant ( Mostly ) '' category of works . The Schuman `` Chester '' takes off from an old William Billings tune with rousing woodwind and brass effect . All these -- potboilers or no -- provided a welcome breath of fresh air in the form of lively , colorful , unstuffy works well suited for the great out-of-doors . It was nice to have something a little up-to-date for a change . We have Alfredo Antonini to thank for this healthy change of diet as well as the lively performances of the Stadium Symphony . A woman who undergoes artificial insemination against the wishes of her husband is the unlikely heroine of `` A Question Of Adultery '' , yesterday's new British import at the Apollo . Since an objective viewer might well conclude that this is not a situation that would often arise , the film's extensive discussion of the problem seems , at best , superfluous . In its present artless , low-budget form , the subject matter seems designed to invite censorial wrath . With Julie London enacting the central role with husky-voiced sincerity , the longsuffering heroine is at least attractive . The explanation offered for her conduct is a misguided attempt to save her marriage to a neurotic husband left sterile as a result of an automobile accident . Anthony Steel , as the husband , is a jealous type who argues against her course and sues for divorce , labeling her action adulterous . The actor plays his role glumly under the lurid direction of Don Chaffey , as do Basil Sydney as his unsympathetic father and Anton Diffring as an innocent bystander . After a protracted , hysterical trial scene more notable for the frankness of its language than for dramatic credibility , the jury , to no one's surprise , leaves the legal question unresolved . When the husband drops the case and returns to his wife , both seem sorry they brought the matter up in the first place . So was the audience . London , July 4 -- For its final change of bill in its London season , the Leningrad State Kirov Ballet chose tonight to give one of those choreographic miscellanies known as a `` gala program '' at the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden . No doubt the underlying idea was to show that for all the elegance and artistry that have distinguished its presentations thus far , it too could give a circus if it pleased . And please it did , in every sense of the word , for it had the audience shouting much of the time in a manner far from typical of London audiences . At the end of the program , indeed , there was a demonstration that lasted for forty-five minutes , and nothing could stop it . Alexandre Livshitz repeated a fantastic technical bit from the closing number , `` Taras Bulba '' , but even then there was a substantial number of diehards who seemed determined not to go home at all . Only a plea from the house manager , John Collins , finally broke up the party . But for all the manifest intention to `` show off '' , this was a circus with a difference , for instead of descending in quality to what is known as a popular level , it added further to the evidence that this is a very great dancing company . The `` Taras Bulba '' excerpt is a rousing version of Gogol's Ukrainian folk-tale choreographed by Bo Fenster to music of Soloviev-Sedoi . It is danced by some thirty-five men and no women , and it contains everything in the books -- lusty comedy , gregarious cavorting , and tricks that only madmen or Russians would attempt to make the human body perform . Yuri Soloviev , Oleg Sokolov , Alexei Zhitkov , Lev Sokolov , Yuri Korneyev and Mr. Livshitz were the chief soloists , but everybody on stage was magnificent . At the other extreme in character was the half-hour excerpt from the Petipa-Minkus ballet `` Bayaderka '' , which opened the evening . What a man this Petipa was ! ! And why do we in the West know so few of his ballets ? ? This scene is a `` white ballet '' in which a lovelorn hero searches for his departed love's spirit among twenty-eight extraordinarily beautiful `` shadows '' who can all dance like nothing human -- which , of course , is altogether fitting . The ensemble enters in a long adagio passage that is of fantastic difficulty , as well as loveliness , and adagio is the general medium of the piece . Its ballerina , Olga Moiseyeva , performs simple miracles of beauty , and Ludmilla Alexeyeva , Inna Korneyeva and Gabrielle Komleva make up a threesome of exquisite accomplishments . Sergei Vikulov , as the lone male , meets the competition well with some brilliant hits , but the work is designed to belong to the ladies . The middle section of the program was made up of short numbers , naturally enough of unequal merit , but all of them pretty good at that . They consisted of a new arrangement of `` Nutcracker '' excerpts danced stunningly by Irina Kolpakova and Mr. Sokolev , with a large ensemble ; ; a winning little `` Snow Maiden '' variation by the adorable Galina Kekisheva ; ; two of those poetic adagios in Greek veils ( and superb esthetic acrobacy ) by Alla Osipenko and Igor Chernishev in one case and Inna Zubkovskaya and Yuri Kornevey in the other ; ; an amusing character pas de cinq called `` Gossiping Women '' ; ; a stirring `` Flames Of Paris '' pas de deux by Xenia Ter-Stepanova and Alexandre Pavlovsky , and a lovely version of Fokine's `` Le Cygne '' by Olga Moiseyeva , which had to be repeated . Vadim Kalentiev was the conductor . It was quite an evening ! ! A year ago today , when the Democrats were fretting and frolicking in Los Angeles and John F. Kennedy was still only an able and ambitious Senator who yearned for the power and responsibility of the Presidency , Theodore H. White had already compiled masses of notes about the Presidential campaign of 1960 . As the pace of the quadrennial American political festival accelerated , Mr. White took more notes . He traveled alternately with Mr. Kennedy and with Richard M. Nixon . He asked intimate questions and got frank answers from the members of what he calls the candidates' `` in-groups '' . He assembled quantities of facts about the nature of American politics in general , as well as about the day-to-day course of the closest Presidential election in American history . Those of us who read the papers may think we know a good deal about that election ; ; how little we know of what there is to be known is made humiliatingly clear by Mr. White in `` The Making Of The President 1960 '' . This is a remarkable book and an astonishingly interesting one . What might have been only warmed-over topical journalism turns out to be an eyewitness contribution to history . Mr. White , who is only a competent novelist , is a brilliant reporter . His zest for specific detail , his sensitivity to emotional atmosphere , his tireless industry and his crisply turned prose all contribute to the effectiveness of his book . A lesson in politics As a dramatic narrative `` The Making Of The President 1960 '' is continuously engrossing . And as an introduction to American politics it is highly educational . The author begins this volume with a close-up of Mr. Kennedy , his family and his entourage waiting for the returns . He then switches back to a consideration of the seven principal Presidential hopefuls : five Democrats -- Senator Hubert H. Humphrey , Senator Stuart Symington , Senator Lyndon B. Johnson , Adlai E. Stevenson and Mr. Kennedy -- and two Republicans -- Governor Rockefeller and Mr. Nixon . Then , in chronological order , Mr. White covers the primary campaigns , the conventions and the Presidential campaign itself . In the process he writes at length about many related matters : the importance of race , religion , local tradition , bosses , organizations , zealous volunteers and television . Mr. White is bluntly frank in his personal opinions . He frequently cites intimate details that seem to come straight from the horse's mouth , from numerous insiders and from Mr. Kennedy himself ; ; but never from Mr. Nixon , who looked on reporters with suspicion and distrust . `` Rarely in American history has there been a political campaign that discussed issues less or clarified them less '' , says Mr. White . Mr. Nixon , he believes , has no particular political philosophy and mismanaged his own campaign . Although a skillful politician and a courageous and honest man , Mr. Nixon , Mr. White believes , ignored his own top-level planners , wasted time and effort in the wrong regions , missed opportunities through indecision and damaged his chances on television . Mr. Nixon is `` a broody , moody man , given to long stretches of introspection ; ; he trusts only himself and his wife . He is a man of major talent -- but a man of solitary , uncertain impulses . He was above all a friend seeker , almost pathetic in his eagerness to be liked . He wanted to identify with people and have a connection with them ; ; the least inspiring candidate since Alfred M. Landon '' . Mr. Kennedy , Mr. White believes , `` had mastered politics on so many different levels that no other American could match him '' . Calm , dignified , composed , `` superbly eloquent '' , Mr. Kennedy always knew everything about everybody . He enlisted a staff of loyal experts and of many zealous volunteers . Every decision was made quickly on sound grounds . Efficiency was enforced and nothing was left to chance . Mr. Kennedy did not neglect to cultivate the personal friendship of reporters . Mr. White admires him profoundly and leaves no doubt that he is a Democrat himself who expects Mr. Kennedy to be a fine President . Pressures portrayed Throughout `` The Making Of A President '' Mr. White shows wonderfully well how the pressures pile up on candidates , how decisions have constantly to be made , how fatigue and illness and nervous strain wear candidates down , how subordinates play key roles . And he makes many interesting comments . Here are several : `` The root question in American politics is always : Who's the Man to See ? ? To understand American politics is , simply , to know people , to know the relative weight of names -- who are heroes , who are straw men , who controls , who does not . But to operate in American politics one must go a step further -- one must build a bridge to such names , establish a warmth , a personal connection '' . `` In the hard life of politics it is well known that no platform nor any program advanced by either major American party has any purpose beyond expressing emotion '' . `` All platforms are meaningless : the program of either party is what lies in the vision and conscience of the candidate the party chooses to lead it '' . Nostalgia week at Lewisohn Stadium , which had begun with the appearance of the 70-year-old Mischa Elman on Tuesday night , continued last night as Lily Pons led the list of celebrities in an evening of French operatic excerpts . Miss Pons is certainly not 70 -- no singer ever is -- and yet the rewards of the evening again lay more in paying tribute to a great figure of times gone by than in present accomplishments . The better part of gallantry might be , perhaps , to honor her perennial good looks and her gorgeous rainbow-hued gown , and to chide the orchestra for not playing in the same keys in which she had chosen to sing . No orchestra , however , could be expected to follow a singer through quite as many adventures with pitch as Miss Pons encountered last night . In all fairness , there were flashes of the great stylist of yesteryear , flashes even of the old consummate vocalism . One such moment came in the breathtaking way Miss Pons sang the cadenza to Meyerbeer's `` Shadow Song '' . The years suddenly fell away at this point . On the whole , however , one must wonder at just what it is that forces a beloved artist to besmirch her own reputation as time marches inexorably on . Sharing the program was the young French-Canadian tenor Richard Verreau , making his stadium debut on this occasion . Mr. Verreau began shakily , with a voice that tended toward an unpleasant whiteness when pushed beyond middle volume . Later on this problem vanished , and the `` Flower Song '' from Bizet's `` Carmen '' was beautifully and intelligently projected . Radio is easily outdistancing television in its strides to reach the minority listener . Lower costs and a larger number of stations are the key factors making such specialization possible . The mushrooming of FM outlets , offering concerts ( both jazz and classical ) , lectures , and other special events , is a phenomenon which has had a fair amount of publicity . Not so well known is the growth of broadcasting operations aimed wholly or partly at Negro listeners -- an audience which , in the United States , comprises some 19,000,000 people with $20,000,000,000 to spend each year . Of course , the nonwhite listener does his share of television watching . He even buys a lot of the products he sees advertised -- despite the fact that the copy makes no special bid for his favor and sponsors rarely use any but white models in commercials . But the growing number of Negro-appeal radio stations , plus evidence of strong listener support of their advertisers , give time salesmen an impressive argument as they approach new prospects . It is estimated that more than 600 stations ( of a total of 3,400 ) do a significant amount of programing for the Negro . At least 60 stations devote all of their time to reaching this audience in about half of the 50 states . These and other figures and comments have been reported in a special supplement of Sponsor magazine , a trade publication for radio and TV advertisers . For 10 years Sponsor has issued an annual survey of the size and characteristics of the Negro market and of successful techniques for reaching this market through radio . In the past 10 years , Sponsor observes , these trends have become apparent : Negro population in the U.S. has increased 25 per cent while the white population was growing by 18 per cent . `` The forgotten 15 million '' -- as Sponsor tagged the Negro market in its first survey -- has become a better-remembered 19 million . Advertisers are changing their attitudes , both as to the significance of this market and the ways of speaking to it . Stations programing to Negro listeners are having to upgrade their shows in order to keep pace with rising educational , economic , and cultural levels . Futhermore , the station which wants real prestige must lead or participate in community improvement projects , not simply serve on the air . In the last decade the number of Negro-appeal radio program hours has risen at least 15 per cent , and the number of Negro-appeal stations has increased 30 per cent , according to a research man quoted by Sponsor . A year ago the Negro Radio Association was formed to spur research which the 30-odd member stations are sure will bring in more business . The 1960 census underscored the explosive character of the population growth . It also brought home proof of something a casual observer might have missed : that more than half of the U.S. Negroes live outside the southeastern states . Also , the state with the largest number of Negroes is New York -- not in the South at all . In New York City , WLIB boasts `` more community service programs than any other Negro station '' and `` one of the largest Negro news staffs in America '' . And WWRL's colorful mobile unit , cruising predominately Negro neighborhoods , is a frequent reminder of that station's round-the-clock dedication to nonwhite interests . Recently , WWRL won praise for its expose of particular cases of employment agency deceit . A half-dozen other stations in the New York area also bid for attention of the city's Negro population , up about 50 per cent in the past decade . In all big cities outside the South , and even in small towns within the South , radio stations can be found beaming some or all of their programs at Negro listeners . The Keystone Broadcasting System's Negro network includes 360 affiliated stations , whose signals reach more than half the total U.S. Negro population . One question which inevitably crops up is whether such stations have a future in a nation where the Negro is moving into a fully integrated status . Whatever the long-range impact of integration , the owners of Negro-appeal radio stations these days know they have an audience and that it is loyal . Advertisers have discovered the tendency of Negroes to shop for brand names they have heard on stations catering to their special interests . And many advertisers have been happy with the results of letting a Negro disc jockey phrase the commercial in his own words , working only from a fact sheet . What sets Negro-appeal programing apart from other radio shows ? ? Sponsor magazine notes the stress on popular Negro bands and singers ; ; rhythm-and-blues mood music ; ; `` race '' music , folk songs and melodies , and gospel programs . Furthermore , news and special presentations inform the listener about groups , projects , and personalities rarely mentioned on a general-appeal station . Advertising copy frequently takes into account matters of special Negro concern . Sponsor quotes John McLendon of the McLendon-Ebony station group as saying that the Southern Negro is becoming conscious of quality and `` does not wish to be associated with radio which is any way degrading to his race ; ; he tends to shy away from the hooting and hollering personalities that originally made Negro radio programs famous '' . The sociological impact is perhaps most eloquently summed up in this quotation of J. Walter Carroll of KSAN , San Francisco : `` Negro-appeal radio is more important to the Negro today , because it provides a direct and powerful mirror in which the Negro can hear and see his ambitions , achievements and desires . It will continue to be important as a means of orientation to the Negro , seeking to become urbanized , as he tries to make adjustment to the urban life . Negro radio is vitally necessary during the process of assimilation '' . Presentation of `` The Life And Times Of John Sloan '' in the Delaware Art Center here suggests a current nostalgia for human values in art . Staged by way of announcing the gift of a large and intimate Sloan collection by the artist's widow , Helen Farr Sloan , to the Wilmington Society of the Fine Arts , the exhibition presents a survey of Sloan's work . From early family portraits , painted before he entered the schools of the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , the chronology extends to a group of paintings executed in his last year ( 1951 ) and still part of his estate . Few artists have left a life work so eloquent of the period in which they lived . Few who have painted the scenes around them have done so with so little bitterness . The paintings , drawings , prints , and illustrations all reflect the manners , costumes , and mores of America in the first half of the present century . Obviously Sloan's early years were influenced by his close friend Robert Henri . As early as 1928 , however , the Sloan style began to change . The dark pigments of the early work were superseded by a brighter palette . The solidity of brush stroke yielded to a hatching technique that finally led to virtual abandonment of American genres in favor of single figure studies and studio nudes . The exhibition presents all phases of Sloan's many-sided art . In addition to the paintings are drawings , prints , and illustrations . Sloan created such works for newspaper supplements before syndication threw him out of a job and sent him to roam the streets of New York , thereby building for America an incomparable city survey from paintings of McSorley's Saloon to breezy clotheslines on city roofs . One of the most appealing of the rooftop canvases is `` Sun And Wind On The Roof '' , with a woman and child bracing themselves against flapping clothes and flying birds . Although there are landscapes in the show ( one of the strongest is a vista of `` Gloucester Harbor '' in 1915 ) , the human element was the compelling factor in Sloan's art . Significant are such canvases as `` Bleeker Street , Saturday Night '' , with its typically American crowd ( Sloan never went abroad ) ; ; the multifigure `` Traveling Carnival '' , in which action is vivified by lighting ; ; or `` Carmine Theater , 1912 '' , the only canvas with an ash can ( and foraging dog ) , although Sloan was a member of the famous `` Eight '' , and of the so-called `` Ash-Can School '' , a term he resented . Not all the paintings , however , are of cities . The exhibition touches briefly on his sojourn in the Southwest ( `` Koshare in the Dust '' , a vigorous Indian dance , and landscapes suggest the influence of western color on his palette ) . The fact that Sloan was an extrovert , concerned primarily with what he saw , adds greatly to the value of his art as a human chronicle . There are 151 items in the Wilmington show , including one painting by each member of the `` Eight '' , as well as work by Sloan's friends and students . Supplementing the actual art are memorabilia -- correspondence , diaries , books from the artist's library , etc. . All belong to the collection being given to Wilmington over a period of years by Mrs. Sloan , who has cherished such revelatory items ever since she first studied with Sloan at the Art Students League , New York , in the 1920's . To enable students and the public to spot Sloan forgeries , the Delaware Art Center ( according to its director , Bruce St. John ) will maintain a complete file of photographs of all Sloan works , as well as a card index file . The entire Sloan collection will be made available at the center to all serious art students and historians . The current exhibition , which remains on view through Oct. 29 , has tapped 14 major collections and many private sources . Any musician playing Beethoven here , where Beethoven was born , is likely to examine his own interpretations with special care . In a sense , he is offering Bonn what its famous son ( who left as a youth ) never did -- the sound of the composer's mature style . Robert Riefling , who gave the only piano recital of the recently concluded 23rd Beethoven Festival , penetrated deep into the spirit of the style . His readings were careful without being fussy , and they were authoritative without being presumptuous . The 32 C Minor Variations with which he opened moved fluently yet logically from one to another , leaving the right impression of abundance under discipline . The D Minor Sonata , Op. 31 No. 2 , introduced by dynamically shaped arpeggios , was most engaging in its moments of quasi-recitative -- single lines in which the fingers seemed to be feeling their way toward the idea to come . These inwardly dramatic moments showed the kind of `` opera style '' of which Beethoven was genuinely capable , but which did not take so kindly to the mechanics of staging . Two late Sonatas , Op. 110 and 111 , were played with similar insight , the disarming simplicities of the Op. 111 Adagio made plain without ever becoming obvious . The two were separated from each other by the Six Bagatelles of Op. 126 . Herr Riefling , in everything he gave his large Beethoven Hall audience , proved himself as an interpreter of unobtrusive authority . Volker Wangenheim , who conducted Bonn's Stadtisches Orchester on the following evening , made one more conscious of the process of interpretation . Herr Wangenheim has only recently become the city's music director , and is a young man with a clear flair for the podium . But he weighted the Eighth Symphony , at times , with a shuddering subjectivity which seemed considerably at odds with the music . He might have been hoping , to all appearances , that this relatively sunny symphony , in conjunction with the Choral Fantasy at the end of the program , could amount to something like the Ninth ; ; but no amount of head-tossing could make it so . The conductor's preoccupation with the business of starting and stopping caused occasional raggedness , as with the first orchestra entrance in the Fourth Piano Concerto , but when he put his deliberations and obsequies aside and let the music move as designed , it did so with plenty of spring . The concerto's soloist , Hans Richter-Haaser , played with compensatory ease and economy , though without the consummate plasticity to which we had been treated on the previous evening by Herr Riefling . His was a burgomaster's Beethoven , solid and sensible . Everybody returned after intermission for the miscellaneous sweepings of the Fantasy For Piano , Chorus , And Orchestra In C Minor , made up by its composer to fill out one of his programs . The entrance of the Stadtisches Gesangverein ( Bonn's civic chorus ) was worth all the waiting , however , as the young Rhenish voices finally brought the music to life . The last program of this festival , which during two weeks had sampled most compositional categories , brought the Cologne Rundfunk-Sinfonie-Orchester and Rundfunkchor to Bonn's gold-filled hall for a performance of the Missa Solemnis . A tribe in ancient India believed the earth was a huge tea tray resting on the backs of three giant elephants , which in turn stood on the shell of a great tortoise . This theory eventually proved inexact . But the primitive method of explaining the unknown with what is known bears at least a symbolic resemblance to the methods of modern science . It is the business of cosmologists , the scientists who study the nature and structure of the universe , to try to solve the great cosmic mysteries by using keys that have clicked open other doors . These keys are the working principles of physics , mathematics and astronomy , principles which are then extrapolated , or projected , to explain phenomena of which we have little or no direct knowledge . In the autumn of 1959 , the British Broadcasting Corporation presented a series of talks by four scientists competent in cosmology . Three of these men discussed major theories of the universe while the other acted as a moderator . The participants were Professor H. Bondi , professor of mathematics at King's College , London ; ; Dr. W. B. Bonnor , reader in mathematics at Queen Elizabeth College , London ; ; Dr. R. A. Lyttleton , a lecturer at St. John's College , Cambridge , and a reader in theoretical astronomy at the University of Cambridge ; ; and Dr. G. J. Whitrow , reader in applied mathematics at the Imperial College of Science and Technology , London . Dr. Whitrow functioned as moderator . The programs were so well received by the British public that the arguments have been published in a totally engrossing little book called , `` Rival Theories Of Cosmology '' . Dr. Bonnor begins with a discussion of the relativistic theories of the universe , based on the general theory of relativity . First of all , and this has been calculated by observation , the universe is expanding -- that is , the galaxies are receding from each other at immense speeds . Because of this Dr. Bonnor holds that the universe is becoming more thinly populated by stars and whatever else is there . This expansion has been going on for an estimated eight billion years . Expands and contracts Dr. Bonnor supports the idea that the universe both expands and contracts , that in several billion years the expansion will slow up and reverse itself and that the contraction will set in . Then , after many more billions of years , when all the galaxies are whistling toward a common center , this movement will slow down and reverse itself again . Professor Bondi disagrees with the expansion-contraction theory . He supports the steady-state theory which holds that matter is continually being created in space . For this reason , he says , the density of the universe always remains the same even though the galaxies are zooming away in all directions . New galaxies are forever being formed to fill in the gaps left by the receding galaxies . If this is true , then the universe today looks just as it did millions of years ago and as it will look millions of years hence , even though the universe is expanding . For new galaxies to be created , Professor Bondi declares , it would only be necessary for a single hydrogen atom to be created in an area the size of your living room once every few million years . He contends this idea doesn't conflict with experiments on which the principle of conservation of matter and energy is based because some slight error must be assumed in such experiments . Dr. Lyttleton backs the theory that we live in an electric universe and this theory starts with the behavior of protons and electrons . Protons and electrons bear opposite electrical charges which make them attract each other , and when they are joined they make up an atom of hydrogen -- the basic building block of matter . The charges of the electron and proton are believed to be exactly equal and opposite , but Dr. Lyttleton is not so sure . Suppose , says Dr. Lyttleton , the proton has a slightly greater charge than the electron ( so slight it is presently immeasurable ) . This would give the hydrogen atom a slight charge-excess . Now if one hydrogen atom were placed at the surface of a large sphere of hydrogen atoms , it would be subject both to the gravitation of the sphere and the charge-excess of all those atoms in the sphere . Because electrical forces ( the charge-excess ) are far more powerful than gravitation , the surface hydrogen atoms would shoot away from the sphere . Dr. Lyttleton then imagines the universe as a large hydrogen sphere with surface atoms shooting away from it . This , he claims , would reasonably account for the expansion of the universe . Fleeting glimpse This slim book , while giving the reader only a fleeting glimpse of the scientific mind confronting the universe , has the appeal that informed conversation always has . Several photographs and charts of galaxies help the non-scientist keep up with the discussion , and the smooth language indicates the contributors were determined to avoid the jargon that seems to work its way into almost every field . It is clear from this discussion that cosmologists of every persuasion look hopefully toward the day when a man-made satellite can be equipped with optical devices which will open up new vistas to science . Presently , the intense absorption of ultra-violet rays in the earth's atmosphere seriously hinders ground observation . These scientists are convinced that a telescope unclouded by the earth's gases will go a long way toward bolstering or destroying cosmic theories . There would seem to be some small solace in the prospect that the missile race between nations is at the same time accelerating the study of the space around us , giving us a long-sought ladder from which to peer at alien regions . In doing away with the tea tray , the elephants and the giant tortoise , science has developed a series of rationally defensible explanations of the cosmos . And although the universe may forever defy understanding , it might even now be finding its match in the imagination of man . `` Roots '' , the new play at the brand-new Mayfair Theater on 46th St. which has been made over from a night club , is about the intellectual and spiritual awakening of an English farm girl . Highly successful in England before its transfer to New York , most of `` Roots '' is as relentlessly dour as the trappings of the small new theater are gaudy . Only in its final scene , where Beatie Bryant ( Mary Doyle ) shakes off the disappointment of being jilted by her intellectual lover and proclaims her emancipation do we get much which makes worthwhile the series of boorish rustic happenings we have had to watch for most of the first two and one-half acts . The burden of Mr. Wesker's message is that people living close to the soil ( at least in England ) are not the happy , fine , strong , natural , earthy people city-bred intellectuals imagine . Rather they are genuine clods , proud of their cloddishness and openly antagonistic to the illuminating influences of aesthetics or thought . They care no more for politics , says Mr. Wesker , than they do for a symphony . Seeming to have roots in the soil , they actually have none in life . They dwell , in short , in the doltish twilight in which peasants and serfs of the past are commonly reported to have lived . But this is a theme which does not take so much time to state as Mr. Wesker dedicates to it . So much untidiness of mind and household does not attract the interest of the theatergoer ( unless he has been living in a gilded palace , perhaps , and wants a real big heap of contrast ) . The messy meals , the washing of dishes , the drying of clothes may be realism , but there is such a thing as redundancy . Now for the good points . Miss Doyle as Beatie has a great fund of animal spirits , a strong voice and a warm smile . She is just home from a sojourn in London where she has become the sweetheart of a young fellow named Ronnie ( we never do see him ) and has been subjected to a first course in thinking and appreciating , including a dose of good British socialism . But while she is able to tell her retarded family about the new world she has seen open before her , Ronnie has not been able to observe her progress , and instead of appearing at a family party to be looked over like a new bull , he sends Beatie a letter of dismissal . Beatie , getting no sympathy for her misfortune , soon rallies and finds that although she has lost a lover she has gained her freedom . Despite a too long sustained declamatory flight , this final speech is convincing , and we see why British audiences apparently were impressed by `` Roots '' . There were several fairly good minor portraits in the play , including William Hansen's impersonation of a stubborn , rather pathetic father , and Katherine Squire's vigorous characterization of a farm mother who brooked no hifalutin' nonsense from her daughter , or anyone else . But I am afraid Mr. Wesker's meat and potatoes dish isn't well seasoned enough for local audiences . Shakespeare had a word for everything , even for the rain that disrupted Wednesday night's `` Much Ado About Nothing '' opening the season of free theatre in Central Park . The New York Shakespeare Festival , which is using the Wollman Memorial Skating Rink while its theatre near the Belvedere is being completed , began bravely . Joseph Papp , impassioned founder of the festival and director of `` Much Ado '' , had a vibrant , colorful production under way . Using a wide stage resourcefully he mingled music and dance with Shakespeare's words in a spirited mixture . The audience filled all the seats inside the Wollman enclosure and overflowed onto the lawns outside the fence . The barbed sallies of Beatrice and Benedick , so contemporary to a public inured to the humor of insult , raised chuckles . The simple-minded comedy of Dogberry and Verges , also familiar in a day that responds easily to jokes skimmed off the top of writers' heads , evoked laughter . The vivacity of the masquers' party at Leonato's palace , with the Spanish motif in the music and dancing in honor of the visiting Prince of Arragon , cast a spell of delight . As `` Much Ado '' turned serious while the insipid Claudio rejected Hero at the altar , a sprinkle began to fall . At first hardly a person in the audience moved , although some umbrellas were opened . But the rain came more heavily , and men and women in light summer clothes began to depart . The grieving Hero and her father , Leonato , followed by the Friar , left the stage . A voice on the loudspeaker system announced that if the rain let up the performance would resume in ten minutes . More than half the audience departed . Some remained in the Wollman enclosure , fortified with raincoats or with newspapers to cover their heads . Others huddled under the trees outside the fence . Twenty minutes after the interruption , although it was still raining , the play was resumed at the point in the fourth act where it had been stopped . Beatrice ( Nan Martin ) and Benedick ( J. D. Cannon ) took their places on the stage . In their very first speeches it was clear that Shakespeare , like a Nostradamus , had foreseen this moment . Said Benedick : `` Lady Beatrice , have you wept all this while '' ? ? Replied Beatrice : `` Yea , and I will weep a while longer '' . The heavens refused to give up their weeping . The gallant company completed Act 4 , and got through part of Act 5 . But the final scenes could not be played . If any among the hardy hundreds who sat in the downpour are in doubt about how it comes out , let them take comfort . `` Much Ado '' ends happily . The Parks Department has done an admirable job of preparing the Wollman Rink for Shakespeare . One could hardly blame Newbold Morris , the Parks Commissioner , for devoting so much grateful mention to the department's technicians who at short notice provided the stage with its rising platforms , its balcony , its generous wings and even its impressive trapdoors for the use of the villains . Eldon Elder , who designed the stage , also created a gay , spacious set that blended attractively with the park background and Shakespeare's lighthearted mood . Mr. Papp has directed a performance that has verve and pace , although he has tolerated obvious business to garner easy laughs where elegance and consistency of style would be preferable . Elisabeth Schwarzkopf sang so magnificently Saturday night at Hunter College that it seems a pity to have to register any complaints . Still a demurrer or two must be entered . Schwarzkopf is , of course , Schwarzkopf . For style and assurance , for a supreme and regal bearing there is still no one who can touch her . If the voice is just a shade less glorious than it used to be , it is still a beautiful instrument , controlled and flexible . Put to the service of lieder of Schubert , Brahms , Strauss and Wolf in a dramatical and musical way , it made its effect with ease and precision . But what has been happening recently might be described as creeping mannerism . Instead of her old confidence in the simplest , purest , most moving musical expression , Miss Schwarzkopf is letting herself be tempted by the classic sin of artistic pride -- that subtle vanity that sometimes misleads a great artist into thinking that he or she can somehow better the music by bringing to it something extra , some personal dramatic touch imposed from the outside . The symptoms Saturday night were unmistakable . Clever light songs were overly coy , tragic songs a little too melodramatic . There was an extra pause here , a gasp or a sigh there , here and there an extra little twist of a word or note , all in the interest of effect . The result was like that of a beautiful painting with some of the highlights touched up almost to the point of garishness . There were stunning musical phrases too , and sometimes the deepest kind of musical and poetic absorption and communication . Miss Schwarzkopf and her excellent pianist , John Wustman , often achieved the highest lyrical ideals of the lieder tradition . All the more reason why there should have been no place for the frills ; ; Miss Schwarzkopf is too great an artist to need them . The dance , dancers and dance enthusiasts ( 8,500 of them ) had a much better time of it at Lewisohn Stadium on Saturday night than all had had two nights earlier , when Stadium Concerts presented the first of two dance programs . On Saturday , the orchestra was sensibly situated down on the field , the stage floor was apparently in decent condition for dancing , and the order of the program improved . There was , additionally , a bonus for the Saturday-night patrons . Alvin Ailey and Carmen De Lavallade appeared in the first New York performance of Mr. Ailey's `` Roots Of The Blues '' , a work given its premiere three weeks ago at the Boston Arts Festival . Otherwise , the program included , as on Thursday , the Taras-Tchaikovsky `` Design For Strings '' , the Dollar-Britten `` Divertimento '' , the Dollar-De Banfield `` The Duel '' and the pas de deux from `` The Nutcracker '' . Maria Tallchief and Erik Bruhn , who danced the `` Nutcracker '' pas de deux , were also seen in the Petipa-Minkus pas de deux from `` Don Quixote '' , another brilliant showpiece that displayed their technical prowess handsomely . Among the other solo ballet dancers of the evening , Elisabeth Carroll and Ivan Allen were particularly impressive in their roles in `` The Duel '' , a work that depends so much upon the precision and incisiveness of the two principal combatants . Mr. Ailey's `` Roots Of The Blues '' , an earthy and very human modern dance work , provided strong contrast to the ballet selections of the evening . As Brother John Sellers sang five `` blues '' to the guitar and drum accompaniments of Bruce Langhorne and Shep Shepard , Mr. Ailey and Miss De Lavallade went through volatile dances that were by turns insinuating , threatening , contemptuous and ecstatic . Their props were two stepladders , a chair and a palm fan . He wore the clothes of a laborer , and she was wondrously seductive in a yellow and orange dress . The cat-like sinuousness and agility of both dancers were exploited in leaps , lifts , crawls and slides that were almost invariably compelling in a work of strong , sometimes almost frightening , tensions . `` Roots Of The Blues '' may not be for gentle souls , but others should welcome its super-charged impact . `` Perhaps it is better to stay at home . The armchair traveler preserves his illusions '' . This somewhat cynical comment may be found in `` Blue Skies , Brown Studies '' , a collection of travel essays by William Sansom , who would never consider staying home for long . Mr. Sansom is English , bearded , formidably cultivated , the versatile author of numerous volumes of short stories , of novels and of pieces that are neither short stories nor travel articles but something midway between . The only man alive who seems qualified by his learning , his disposition and his addiction to a baroque luxuriance of language to inherit the literary mantle of Sacheverell Sitwell , Mr. Sansom writes of foreign parts with a dedication to decoration worthy of a pastry chef creating a wedding cake for the marriage of a Hungarian beauty ( her third ) and an American multimillionaire ( his fourth ) . The result is rather wonderful , but so rich as to be indigestible if taken in too thick slices . There are sixteen essays in `` Blue Skies , Brown Studies '' . Most of them were written between 1953 and 1960 and originally appeared in various magazines . All are well written and are overwritten . But , even if Mr. Sansom labors too hard to extract more refinements of meaning and feeling from his travel experiences than the limits of language allow , he still can charm and astound . Too many books and articles are just assembled by putting one word after another . Mr. Sansom actually writes his with a nice ear for a gracefully composed sentence , with an intense relish in all the metaphorical resources of English , with a thick shower of sophisticated , cultural references . A contemplative connoisseur `` I like to sniff a place , and reproduce what it really smells and looks like , its color , its particular kind of life '' . This is an exact description of what Mr. Sansom does . He ignores guidebook facts . He only rarely tells a personal anecdote and hardly ever sketches an individual or quotes his opinions . It is an over-all impression Mr. Sansom strives for , an impression compounded of visual details , of a savory mixture of smells , of much loving attention to architecture and scenery , of lights and shadows , of intangibles of atmosphere and of echoes of the past . William Sansom writes only about Europe in this book and frequently of such familiar places as London , Vienna , the French Riviera and the Norwegian fjords . But no matter what he writes about he brings to his subject his own original mind and his own sensitive reactions . `` A writer lives , at best , in a state of astonishment '' , he says . `` Beneath any feeling he has of the good or the evil of the world lies a deeper one of wonder at it all . To transmit that feeling he writes '' . This may not be true of many writers , but it certainly is true of Mr. Sansom . So in these pages one can share his wonder at the traditional fiesta of St. Torpetius that still persists in St. Tropez ; ; at the sun and the heat of Mediterranean lands , always much brighter and hotter to an Englishman than to an American used to summers in New York or Kansas City ; ; at the supreme delights to be found in one of the world's finest restaurants , La Bonne Auberge , which is situated on the seacoast twenty miles west of the Nice airport ; ; and at the infinite variety of London . Mr. Sansom can be eloquent in a spectacular way which recalls ( to those who recall easily ) the statues of Bernini and the gigantic paintings of Tintoretto . He can coin a neat phrase : `` a street spattered with an invigoration of people '' ; ; tulips with `` petals wide and shaggy as a spaniel's ears '' ; ; after a snowstorm a landscape smelling `` of woodsmoke and clarity '' . And , for all his lacquered , almost Byzantine self-consciousness , he can make one recognize the aptness of an unexpected comparison . Beauty borrowed from afar In one of his best essays Mr. Sansom expresses his enthusiasm for the many country mansions designed by Andrea Palladio himself that dot the environs of Vicenza . How far that pedimented and pillared style has shed its influence Mr. Sansom reminds us thus : `` The white colonnaded , cedar-roofed Southern mansion is directly traceable via the grey and buff stone of grey-skied England to the golden stucco of one particular part of the blue South , the Palladian orbit stretching out from Vicenza : the old mind of Andrea Palladio still smiles from behind many an old rocking chair on a Southern porch , the deep friezes of his architectonic music rise firm above the shallower freeze in the kitchen , his feeling for light and shade brings a glitter from a tall mint julep , his sense of columns framing the warm velvet night has brought together a million couple of mating lips '' . Nice , even if a trifle gaudy . `` Blue Skies , Brown Studies '' is illustrated with numerous excellent photographs . In recent days there have been extensive lamentations over the absence of original drama on television , but not for years have many regretted the passing of new plays on radio . WBAI , the listener-supported outlet on the frequency-modulation band , has decided to do what it can to correct this aural void . Yesterday it offered `` Poised For Violence '' , by Jean Reavey . WBAI is on the right track : in the sound medium there has been excessive emphasis on music and news and there could and should be a place for theatre , as the Canadian and British Broadcasting Corporations continue to demonstrate . Unfortunately , `` Poised For Violence '' was not the happiest vehicle with which to make the point . Mrs. Reavey's work is written for the stage -- it is mentioned for an off-Broadway production in the fall -- and , in addition , employs an avant-garde structure that particularly needs to be seen if comprehension is to be encouraged . The play's device is to explore society's obsession with disaster and violence through the eyes of a group of artist's models who remain part of someone else's painting rather than just be themselves . In a succession of scenes they appear in different guises -- patrons of a cafe , performers in a circus and participants in a family picnic -- but in each instance they inevitably put ugliness before beauty . Somewhere in Mrs. Reavey's play there is both protest and aspiration of merit . But its relentless discursiveness and determined complexity are so overwhelming that after an hour and a half a listener's stamina begins to wilt . Moreover , her central figures are so busily fulfilling their multitudinous assignments that none emerges as an arresting individual in his own right or as a provocative symbol of mankind's ills . But quite conceivably an altogether different impression will obtain when the work is offered in the theatre and there can be other effects to relieve the burden on the author's words . Which in itself is an immediate reward of the WBAI experiment ; ; good radio drama has its own special demands that badly need reinvigoration . A weekly showcase for contemporary music , from the austere archaism of Stravinsky to the bleeps and bloops of electronic music , is celebrating its fourth anniversary this month . Titled `` What's New In Music '' ? ? The enterprising program is heard Saturday afternoons on radio station Aj . The brief notes introducing each work offer salient historical or technical points , and many listeners are probably grateful for being intelligently taken by the hand through an often difficult maze . The show is programed and written by the station's assistant continuity editor , Chuck Briefer . The first Saturday in each month is set aside for new recordings . Last Saturday's interesting melange included Ernst Toch , Karlheinz Stockhausen , Richard Yardumian and a brief excerpt from a new `` space '' opera by the Swedish composer , Karl-Birger Blomdahl . Other Saturdays are devoted to studies of a selected American composer , a particular type of music or the music of a given country . It is commendable that a regularly scheduled hour is set aside for an introduction to the contemporary musical scene . But one wishes , when the appetite is whetted , as it was in the case of the all-too-brief excerpt from the Blomdahl opera , that further opportunity would be provided both for hearing the works in their entirety and for a closer analytical look at the sense and nature of the compositions . The Moiseyev Dance Company dropped in at Madison Square Garden last night for the first of four farewell performances before it brings its long American tour to a close . It is not simply giving a repetition of the program it gave during its New York engagement earlier this season , but has brought back many of the numbers that were on the bill when it paid us its first visit and won everybody's heart . It is good to see those numbers again . The `` Suite Of Old Russian Dances '' that opened that inaugural program with the slow and modest entrance of the maidens and built steadily into typical Moiseyev vigor and warmth ; ; the amusing `` Yurochka '' , in which a hard-to-please young man is given his come-uppance ; ; the lovely ( and of course vigorous ) `` Polyanka '' or `` The Meadow '' ; ; the three Moldavian dances entitled `` Zhok '' ; ; the sweet and funny little dance about potato planting called `` Bul'ba '' ; ; and the hilarious picture of social life in an earlier day called `` City Quadrille '' are all just as good as one remembers them to have been , and they are welcome back . So , for that matter , are the newer dances -- the `` Kalmuk Dance '' with its animal movements , that genial juggling act by Sergei Tsvetkov called `` The Platter '' , the rousing and beautiful betrothal celebration called `` Summer '' , `` The Three Shepherds '' of Azerbaijan hopping up on their staffs , and , of course , the trenchant `` Rock 'n' Roll '' . As autumn starts its annual sweep , few Americans and Canadians realize how fortunate they are in having the world's finest fall coloring . Spectacular displays of this sort are relatively rare in the entire land surface of the earth . The only other regions so blessed are the British Isles , western Europe , eastern China , southern Chile and parts of Japan , New Zealand and Tasmania . Their autumn tints are all fairly low keyed compared with the fiery stabs of crimson , gold , purple , bronze , blue and vermilion that flame up in North America . Jack Frost is not really responsible for this great seasonal spectacle ; ; in fact , a freezing autumn dulls the blaze . The best effects come from a combination of temperate climate and plenty of late-summer rain , followed by sunny days and cool nights . Foliage pilgrimages , either organized or individual , are becoming an autumn item for more and more Americans each year . Below is a specific guide , keyed to the calendar . Nature Canada . Late September finds Quebec's color at its peak , especially in the Laurentian hills and in the area south of the St. Lawrence River . In the Maritime provinces farther east , the tones are a little quieter . Ontario's foliage is most vivid from about Sept. 23 to Oct. 10 , with both Muskoka ( 100 miles north of Toronto ) and Haliburton ( 125 miles northwest of Toronto ) holding color cavalcades starting Sept. 23 . In the Canadian Rockies , great groves of aspen are already glinting gold . New England . Vermont's sugar maples are scarlet from Sept. 25 to Oct. 15 , and often hit a height in early October . New Hampshire figures its peak around Columbus Day and boasts of all its hardwoods including the yellow of the birches . The shades tend to be a little softer in the forests that blanket so much of Maine . In western Massachusetts and northwest Connecticut , the Berkshires are at their vibrant prime the first week of October . Middle Atlantic states . The Adirondacks blaze brightest in early October , choice routes being 9N from Saratoga up to Lake George and 73 and 86 in the Lake Placid area . Farther south in New York there is a heavy haze of color over the Catskills in mid-October , notably along routes 23 and 23A . About the same time the Alleghenies and Poconos in Pennsylvania are magnificent -- Renovo holds its annual Flaming Foliage Festival on Oct. 14 , 15 . New Jersey's color varies from staccato to pastel all the way from the Delaware Water Gap to Cape May . Southeast . During the first half of October the Blue Ridge and other parts of the Appalachians provide a spectacle stretching from Maryland and West Virginia to Georgia . The most brilliant displays are along the Skyline Drive above Virginia's Shenandoah Valley and throughout the Great Smokies between North Carolina and Tennessee . Midwest . Michigan , Wisconsin and Minnesota have many superb stretches of color which reach their height from the last few days of September well into October , especially in their northern sections , e.g. , Wisconsin's Vilas County whose Colorama celebration is Sept. 29-Oct. 8 . In Wisconsin , take route 55 north of Shawano or routes 78 and 60 from Portage to Prairie Du Chien . In Michigan , there is fine color on route 27 up to the Mackinac Straits , while the views around Marquette and Iron Mountain in the Upper Peninsula are spectacular . In Minnesota , Arrowhead County and route 53 north to International Falls are outstanding . Farther south , there are attractive patches all the way to the Ozarks , with some seasonal peaks as late as early November . Illinois' Shawnee National Forest , Missouri's Iron County and the maples of Hiawatha , Kan. should be at their best in mid-October . The West . The Rockies have many `` Aspencades '' , which are organized tours of the aspen areas with frequent stops at vantage points for viewing the golden panoramas . In Colorado , Ouray has its Fall Color Week Sept. 22-29 , Rye and Salida both sponsor Aspencades Sept. 24 , and Steamboat Springs has a week-long Aspencade Sept. 25-30 . New Mexico's biggest is at Ruidoso Oct. 7 , 8 , while Alamogordo and Cloudcroft cooperate in similar trips Oct. 1 . Americana pleasure domes . Two sharply contrasting places designed for public enjoyment are now on display . The Corn Palace at Mitchell , S. Dak. , `` the world's corniest building '' , has a carnival through Sept. 23 headlining the Three Stooges and Pee Wee Hunt . Since 1892 ears of red , yellow , purple and white corn have annually been nailed to 11 big picture panels to create huge `` paintings '' . The 1961 theme is the Dakota Territorial Centennial , with the pictures including the Lewis and Clark expedition , the first river steamboat , the 1876 gold rush , a little red schoolhouse on the prairie , and today's construction of large Missouri River reservoirs . The panels will stay up until they are replaced next summer . Longwood Gardens , near Kennett Square , Pa. ( about 12 miles from Wilmington , Del. ) , was developed and heavily endowed by the late Pierre S. Du Pont . Every Wednesday night through Oct. 11 there will be an elaborate colored fountain display , with 229 nozzles throwing jets of water up to 130 feet . The `` peacock tail '' nozzle throws a giant fan of water 100 feet wide and 40 feet high . The gardens themselves are open free of charge the year round , and the 192 permanent employes make sure that not a dead or wilted flower is ever seen indoors or out by any visitor . The greenhouses alone cover 3-1/2 acres . Books clock without hands . Carson McCullers , after a long , painful illness that might have crushed a less-indomitable soul , has come back with an absolute gem of a novel which jumped high on best-seller lists even before official publication . Though the subject -- segregation in her native South -- has been thoroughly worked , Miss McCullers uses her poet's instinct and storyteller's skill to reaffirm her place at the very top of modern American writing . Franny and Zooey . With an art that almost conceals art , J. D. Salinger can create a fictional world so authentic that it hurts . Here , in the most eagerly awaited novel of the season ( his first since The Catcher In The Rye , ) he tells of a college girl in flight from the life around her and the tart but sympathetic help she gets from her 25-year-old brother . The Head Of Monsieur M. , Althea Urn . A deft , hilarious satire on very high French society involving a statesman with two enviable possessions , a lovely young bride and a head containing such weighty thoughts that he has occasionally to remove it for greater comfort . There is probably a moral in all this about `` mind vs. heart '' . A Matter Of Life And Death . Virgilia Peterson , a critic by trade , has turned her critical eye pitilessly and honestly on herself in an autobiography more of the mind and heart than of specific events . It is an engrossing commentary on a repressive , upper-middle-class New York way of life in the first part of this century . Dark Rider . This retelling by Louis Zara of the brief , anguished life of Stephen Crane -- poet and master novelist at 23 , dead at 28 -- is in novelized form but does not abuse its tragic subject . Rural Free , Rachel Peden . Subtitled A Farmwife's Almanac Of Country Living , this is a gentle and nostalgic chronicle of the changing seasons seen through the clear , humorous eye of a Hoosier housewife and popular columnist . Dance Russians , Filipinos . Two noted troupes from overseas will get the fall dance season off to a sparkling start . Leningrad's Kirov Ballet , famous for classic purity of technique , begins its first U.S. tour in New York ( through Sept. 30 ) . The Bayanihan Philippine Dance Company , with music and dances that depict the many facets of Filipino culture , opens its 60-city U.S. tour in San Francisco ( through Sept. 24 ) then , via one-night stands , moves on to Los Angeles ( Sept. 29 thru Oct. 1 ) . Festivals across the land . With harvests in full swing , you can enjoy festivals for grapes at Sonoma , Calif. ( Sept. 22-24 ) , as well as for cranberries at Bandon , Ore. ( Sept. 28 thru Oct. 1 ) , for buckwheat at Kingwood , W. Va. ( Sept. 28-30 ) , sugar cane at New Iberia , La. ( Sept. 29 thru Oct. 1 ) and tobacco at Richmond , Va. ( Sept. 23-30 ) . The mule is honored at Benson , N.C. ( Sept. 22 , 23 ) and at Boron , Calif. ( Sept. 24 thru Oct. 1 ) , while the legend of the Maid of the Mist is celebrated at Niagara Falls through the 24th . The fine old mansions of U.S. Grant's old home town of Galena , Ill. are open for inspection ( Sept. 23 , 24 ) . An archery tournament will be held at North Falmouth , Mass. ( Sept. 23 , 24 ) . The 300th anniversaries of Staten Island ( through Sept. 23 ) and of Mamaroneck , N.Y. ( through Sept. 24 ) will both include parades and pageants . Movies Purple Noon : This French film , set in Italy , is a summertime splurge in shock and terror all shot in lovely sunny scenery -- so breath-taking that at times you almost forget the horrors the movie is dealing with . But slowly they take over as Alain Delon ( Life , Sept. 15 ) , playing a sometimes appealing but always criminal boy , casually tells a rich and foot-loose American that he is going to murder him , then does it even while the American is trying to puzzle out how Delon expects to profit from the act . Records Norma . Callas devotees will have good reason to do their customary cart wheels over a new and complete stereo version of the Bellini opera . Maria goes all out as a Druid princess who gets two-timed by a Roman big shot . By turns , her beautifully sung Norma is fierce , tender , venomous and pitiful . The tenor lead , Franco Corelli , and La Scala cast under Maestro Tullio Serafin are all first rate . Jeremiah Peabody's polyunsaturated quick dissolving fast acting pleasant tasting green and purple pills . In a raucous take-off on radio commercials , Singer Ray Stevens hawks a cure-all for neuritis , neuralgia , head-cold distress , beriberi , overweight , fungus , mungus and water on the knee . Of the nation's eight million pleasure-boat owners a sizable number have learned that late autumn is one of the loveliest seasons to be afloat -- at least in that broad balmy region that lies below America's belt line . Waterways are busy right now from the Virginia capes to the Texas coast . There true yachtsmen often find November winds steadier , the waters cooler , the fish hungrier , and rivers more pleasant -- less turbulence and mud , and fewer floating logs . More and more boats move overland on wheels ( 1.8 million trailers are now in use ) and Midwesterners taking long weekends can travel south with their craft . In the Southwest , the fall brings out flotillas of boatsmen who find the summer too hot for comfort . And on northern shores indomitable sailors from Long Island to Lake Michigan will beat around the buoys in dozens of frostbite races . Some pleasant fall cruising country is mapped out below . Boating west coast . Pleasure boating is just scooting into its best months in California as crisp breezes bring out craft of every size on every kind of water -- ocean , lake and reservoir . Shore facilities are enormous -- Los Angeles harbors 5,000 boats , and Long Beach 3,000 -- but marinas are crowded everywhere . New docks and ramps are being rushed at Playa Del Rey , Ventura , Dana Point , Oceanside and Mission Bay . Inland , outboard motorists welcome cooler weather and the chance to buzz over Colorado River sandbars and Lake Mead . Newest small-boat playground is the Salton Sea , a once-dry desert sinkhole which is now a salty lake 42 miles long and 235 feet below sea level . On Nov. 11 , 12 , racers will drive their flying shingles in 5-mile laps over its 500-mile speedboat course . In San Francisco Bay , winds are gusty and undependable during this season . A sailboat may have a bone in her teeth one minute and lie becalmed the next . But regattas are scheduled right up to Christmas . The Corinthian Yacht Club in Tiburon launches its winter races Nov. 5 . Gulf Coast . Hurricane Carla damaged 70% of the marinas in the Galveston-Port Aransas area but fuel service is back to normal , and explorers can roam as far west as Port Isabel on the Mexican border . Sailing activity is slowed down by Texas northers , but power cruisers can move freely , poking into the San Jacinto , Trinity and Brazos rivers ( fine tarpon fishing in the Brazos ) or pushing eastward to the pirate country of Barataria . Off Grand Isle , yachters often visit the towering oil rigs . The Mississippi Sound leads into a protected waterway running about 200 miles from Pascagoula to Apalachicola . Lower Mississippi . Memphis stinkpotters like McKellar Lake , inside the city limits , and sailors look for autumn winds at Arkabutla Lake where fall racing is now in progress . River cruising for small craft is ideal in November . At New Orleans , 25-mile-square Lake Pontchartrain has few squalls and year-long boating . Marinas are less plush than the Florida type but service is good and Creole cooking better . tva lakes . Ten thousand twisty miles of shoreline frame the 30-odd lakes in the vast Tennessee River system that loops in and out of seven states . When dam construction began in 1933 , fewer than 600 boats used these waters ; ; today there are 48,500 . A year ago it was bruited that the primary character in Erich Maria Remarque's new novel was based on the Marquis Alfonso De Portago , the Spanish nobleman who died driving in the Mille Miglia automobile race of 1957 . If this was in fact Mr. Remarque's intention he has achieved a notable failure . Clerfayt of `` Heaven Has No Favorites '' resembles Portago only in that he is male and a race-driver -- quite a bad race-driver , whereas Portago was a good one . He is a dull , unformed , and aimless person ; ; the twelfth Marquis De Portago was intelligent , purposeful , and passionate . One looked forward to Mr. Remarque's ninth book if only because not even a reasonably good novel has yet been written grounded on automobile racing , as dramatic a sport as mankind has devised . Unhappily , `` Heaven Has No Favorites '' does not alter the record except to add one more bad book to the list . Mr. Remarque's conception of this novel was sound and perhaps even noble . He proposed throwing together a man in an occupation of high hazard and a woman balanced on a knife-edge between death from tuberculosis and recovery . His treatment of it is something else . His heroine chooses to die -- the price of recovery , years under the strict regimen of a sanatorium , being higher than she wishes to pay . Her lover precedes her in death , at the wheel , and presumably he too has chosen . Between the first meeting of Clerfayt and Lillian and this dismal denouement , Mr. Remarque has laid down many pages of junior-philosophical discourse , some demure and rather fetching love-making , pleasant talk about some of the countryside and restaurants of Europe , and a modicum of automobile racing . The ramblings on life , death , and the wonder of it all are distressing ; ; the love-making , perhaps because it is pale and low-key when one has been conditioned to expect harsh colors and explicitness , is often charming ; ; the automobile racing bears little relation to reality . This latter failure is more than merely bad reportage and it is distinctly more important than it would have been had the author drawn Clerfayt as , say , a tournament golfer . Hazards to life and limb on the golf course , while existent , are actuarially insignificant . Race-drivers , on the other hand , are quite often killed on the circuit , and since it was obviously Mr. Remarque's intention to establish automobile racing as life in microcosm , one might reasonably have expected him to demonstrate precise knowledge not only of techniques but of mores and attitudes . He does not . The jacket biography describes him as a former racing driver , and he may indeed have been , although I do not recall having encountered his name either in the records or the literature . Perhaps he has only forgotten a great deal . The book carries a disclaimer in which Remarque says it has been necessary for him to take minor liberties with some of the procedures and formalities of racing . The necessity is not clear to me , and , in any case , to present a case-hardened race-driver as saying he has left his car , which , or whom , he calls `` Giuseppe '' , parked `` on the Place Vendome sneering at a dozen Bentleys and Rolls-Royces parked around him '' is not a liberty ; ; it is an absurdity . But it is in the matter of preoccupation with death , which is the primary concern of the book , that Remarque's failure is plainest . Clerfayt is neurotic , preoccupied , and passive . To be human , he believes , is to seek one's own destruction : the Freudian `` death-wish '' cliche inevitably cited whenever laymen talk about auto race-drivers . In point of fact , the race-drivers one knows are nearly always intelligent , healthy technicians who differ from other technicians only in the depth of the passion they feel for the work by which they live . A Clerfayt may moon on about the face of Death in the cockpit ; ; a Portago could say , as he did say to me , `` If I die tomorrow , still I have had twenty-eight wonderful years ; ; but I shan't die tomorrow ; ; I'll live to be 105 '' . Clerfayt , transported , may think of the engine driving his car as `` a mystical beast under the hood '' . The Italian master Piero Taruffi , no less sensitive , knows twice the ecstasy though he thinks of a car's adhesion to a wet two-lane road at 165 miles an hour as a matter best expressed in algebraic formulae . Clerfayt , driving , sees himself `` a volcano whose cone funneled down to hell '' ; ; the Briton Stirling Moss , one of the greatest virtuosi of all time , believes that ultra-fast road-circuit driving is an art form related to ballet . Errors in technical terminology suggest that the over-all translation from the German may not convey quite everything Mr. Remarque hoped to tell us . However , my principal objection in this sort of novel is to the hackneyed treatment of race-drivers , pilots , submariners , atomic researchers , and all the machine-masters of our age as brooding mystics or hysterical fatalists . The west is leaderless , according to this book . In contrast , the East is ably led by such stalwart heroes as Khrushchev , Tito , and Mao . Against this invincible determination to communize the whole world stands a group of nations unable to agree on fundamentals and each refusing to make any sacrifice of sovereignty for the common good of all . It is Field Marshal Montgomery's belief that in most Western countries about 60 per cent of the people do not really care about democracy or Christianity ; ; about 30 per cent call themselves Christians in order to keep up appearances and be considered respectable , and only the last 10 per cent are genuine Christians and believers in democracy . But these Western countries do care about themselves . Each feels intensely national . If , say , the Russians intended to stop Tom Jones' going to the pub , then Tom Jones would fight the Commies . But he would fight for his own liberty rather than for any abstract principle connected with it -- such as `` cause '' . For all practical purposes , the West stands disunited , undedicated , and unprepared for the tasks of world leadership . With this barrage , Montgomery of Alamein launches his attack upon the blunderings of the West . Never given to mincing words , he places heavy blame upon the faulty , uncourageous leadership of Britain and particularly America . At war's end leadership in Western Europe passed from Britain because the Labour Government devoted its attention to the creation of a welfare state . With Britain looking inward , overseas problems were neglected and the baton was passed on to the United States . Montgomery believes that she started well . `` America gave generously in economic aid and military equipment to friend and foe alike '' . She pushed wartorn and poverty-stricken nations into prosperity , but she failed to lead them into unity and world peace . America has divided more than she has united the West . The reasons are that America generally believes that she can buy anything with dollars , and that she compulsively strives to be liked . However , she really does not know how to match the quantity of dollars given away by a quality of leadership that is basically needed . But the greater reason for fumbling , stumbling American leadership is due to the shock her pride suffered when the Japanese attacked at Pearl Harbor . `` They are determined '' , Montgomery writes , `` not to be surprised again , and now insist on a state of readiness for war which is not only unnecessary , but also creates nervousness among other nations in the Western Alliance -- not to mention such great suspicions among the nations of the Eastern bloc that any progress towards peaceful coexistence or disarmament is not possible '' . The net result is that under American leadership the general world situation has become bad . To `` Monty '' , the American people , who in two previous world wars were very reluctant to join the fight , `` now look like the nation most likely to lead us all into a third World War '' . As faulty as has been our leadership clearly the United States must be relied upon to lead . The path to leadership is made clear . Montgomery calls for a leader who will first put the West's own house in order . Such a man must be able and willing to give clear and sensible advice to the whole group , a person in whom all the member nations will have absolute confidence . This leader must be a man who lives above illusions that heretofore have shaped the foreign policy of the United States , namely that Russia will agree to a reunited Germany , that the East German government does not exist , that events in Japan in June 1960 were Communist-inspired , that the true government of China is in Formosa , that Mao was the evil influence behind Khrushchev at the Summit Conference in Paris in May 1960 , and that either China or Russia wants or expects war . Such a leader must strengthen NATO politically , and establish that true unity about which it has always talked . After drastically overhauling NATO , Western leadership should turn to reducing the suspicions that tear apart the East and West . Major to this effort is to get all world powers to withdraw to their own territories , say by 1970 . `` The West should make the central proposal ; ; but the East would have to show sincerity in carrying it out '' . `` But where is the leader who will handle all these things for us '' ? ? Montgomery knew all the national leaders up to the time of Kennedy . The man whom he would select as our leader for this great task is De Gaulle . He alone has the wisdom , the conviction , the tenacity , and the courage to reach a decision . But De Gaulle is buried in the cause of restoring France's lost soul . Whoever rises to the occasion walks a treacherous path to leadership . The leader Montgomery envisages will need to discipline himself , lead a carefully regulated and orderly life , allow time for quiet thought and reflection , adapt decisions and plans to changing situations , be ruthless , particularly with inefficiency , and be honest and morally proper . All in all , Montgomery calls for a leader who will anticipate and dominate the events that surround him . In looking as far back as Moses , thence to Cromwell , Napoleon , Lincoln , Churchill , and Nehru , Montgomery attempts to trace the stirrings and qualities of great men . He believes that greatness is a marriage between the man and the times as was aptly represented by Churchill , who would very possibly have gone down in history as a political failure if it had not been for Hitler's war . However , Montgomery makes little contribution to leadership theory and practice . Most of what is said about his great men of history has already been said , and what has not is largely irrelevant to the contemporary scene . Like Eisenhower , he holds the militarist's suspicion of politicians . However , at the same time Montgomery selects as his hero De Gaulle , who is a militarist dominated by political ambitions . `` Monty '' shows a remarkable capacity for the direct statement and an equally remarkable incapacity for giving adequate support . For the most part , his writing rambles and jogs , preventing easy access by the reader to his true thoughts . Nevertheless , Montgomery has stated courageously and wisely the crisis of the Western world . It suffers from a lack of unity of purpose and respect for heroic leadership . And it remains to be seen if the new frontier now taking form can produce the leadership and wisdom necessary to understand the current shape of events . It is no common thing for a listener ( critical or otherwise ) to hear a singer `` live '' for the first time only after he has died . But then , Mario Lanza was no common singer , and his whole career , public and non-public , was studded with the kind of unconventional happenings that terminate with the appearance of his first `` recital '' only when he has ceased to be a living voice . It is a kind of justice , too , that it should originate in London's Royal Albert Hall , where , traditionally , the loudest , if not the greatest , performers have entertained the thousands it will accommodate ( RCA Victor LM 2454 , $4.98 ) . To be sure , Lanza made numerous concert tours , here and abroad , but these did not take him to New York where the carping critic might lurk . The reading public , the theatergoing public , the skindiving public , the horse-playing public -- all these and others fill substantial roles in U.S. life , but none is so varied , vast and vigilant as the eating public . The Department of Agriculture averaged out U.S. food consumption last year at 1,488 lbs. per person , which , allowing for the 17 million Americans that John Kennedy said go to bed hungry every night , means that certain gluttons on the upper end must somehow down 8 lbs. or more a day . That mother hen of the weight-height tables , the Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. , clucks that 48 million Americans are overweight . Through previous centuries , eating changed by nearly imperceptible degrees , and mostly toward just getting enough . Now big forces buffet food . For the first time in history , the U.S. has produced a society in which less than one-tenth of the people turn out so much food that the Government's most embarrassing problem is how to dispose inconspicuously of 100 million tons of surplus farm produce . In this same society , the plain citizen can with an average of only one-fifth his income buy more calories than he can consume . Refrigeration , automated processing and packaging conspire to defy season and banish spoilage . And in the wake of the new affluence and the new techniques of processing comes a new American interest in how what people eat affects their health . To eat is human , the nation is learning to think , to survive divine . Fads , facts Not all the concern for health is well directed . From the fusty panaceas of spinach , eggs and prunes , the U.S. has progressed to curds , concentrates and capsules . Each year , reports the American Medical Association , ten million Americans spend $900 million on vitamins , tonics and other food supplements . At juice bars in Los Angeles' 35 `` health '' stores , a new sensation is a pink , high-protein cocktail , concocted of dried eggs , powdered milk and cherry-flavored No-Cal , which sells for 59-cents per 8-oz. glass . Grocery stores sell dozens of foods that boast of having almost no food value at all . But a big part of the public wants to know facts about diet and health , and a big group of U.S. scientists wants to supply them . The man most firmly at grips with the problem is the University of Minnesota's Physiologist Ancel Keys , 57 , inventor of the wartime K ( for Keys ) ration and author of last year's bestselling Eat Well And Stay Well . From his birch-paneled office in the Laboratory of Physiological Hygiene , under the university's football stadium in Minneapolis ( `` We get a rumble on every touchdown '' ) , blocky , grey-haired Dr. Keys directs an ambitious , $200,000-a-year experiment on diet , which spans three continents and seven nations and is still growing . Pursuing it , he has logged 500,000 miles , suffered indescribable digestive indignities , and meticulously collected physiological data on the health and eating habits of 10,000 individuals , from Bantu tribesmen to Italian contadini . He has measured the skinfolds ( the fleshy areas under the shoulder blades ) of Neapolitan firemen , studied the metabolism of Finnish woodcutters , analyzed the `` mealie-meal '' eaten by Capetown coloreds , and experimented on Minneapolis businessmen . And fats . Keys's findings , though far from complete , are likely to smash many an eating cliche . Vitamins , eggs and milk begin to look like foods to hold down on ( though mothers' milk is still the ticket ) . Readings of the number of milligrams of cholesterol in the blood , which seem to have value in predicting heart attacks , are becoming as routine as the electrocardiogram , which can show that the heart has suffered a symptomatic attack . Already many an American knows his count , and rejoices or worries depending on whether it is nearer 180 ( safe ) or 250 ( dangerous ) . Out of cholesterol come Keys's main messages so far : Americans eat too much . The typical U.S. daily menu , says Dr. Keys , contains 3,000 calories , should contain 2,300 . And extra weight increases the risk of cancer , diabetes , artery disease and heart attack . Americans eat too much fat . With meat , milk , butter and ice cream , the calorie-heavy U.S. diet is 40% fat , and most of that is saturated fat -- the insidious kind , says Dr. Keys , that increases blood cholesterol , damages arteries , and leads to coronary disease . Obesity : a malnutrition . Throughout much of the world , food is still so scarce that half of the earth's population has trouble getting the 1,600 calories a day necessary to sustain life . The deficiency diseases -- scurvy , tropical sprue , pellagra -- run rampant . In West Africa , for example , where meat is a luxury and babies must be weaned early to make room at the breast for later arrivals , a childhood menace is kwashiorkor , or `` Red Johnny '' , a growth-stunting protein deficiency ( signs : reddish hair , bloated belly ) that kills more than half its victims , leaves the rest prey for parasites and lingering tropical disease . In the well-fed U.S. , deficiency diseases have virtually vanished in the past 20 years . Today , as Harrison's Principles Of Internal Medicine , a standard internist's text , puts it , `` The most common form of malnutrition is caloric excess or obesity '' . Puritan New England regarded obesity as a flagrant symbol of intemperance , and thus a sin . Says Keys : `` Maybe if the idea got around again that obesity is immoral , the fat man would start to think '' . Morals aside , the fat man has plenty to worry about -- over and above the fact that no one any longer loves him . The simple mechanical strain of overweight , says New York's Dr. Norman Jolliffe , can overburden and damage the heart `` for much the same reason that a Chevrolet engine in a Cadillac body would wear out sooner than if it were in a body for which it was built '' . The fat man has trouble buying life insurance or has to pay higher premiums . He has -- for unclear reasons -- a 25% higher death rate from cancer . He is particularly vulnerable to diabetes . He may find even moderate physical exertion uncomfortable , because excess body fat hampers his breathing and restricts his muscular movement . Physiologically , people overeat because what Dr. Jolliffe calls the `` appestat '' is set too high . The appestat , which adjusts the appetite to keep weight constant , is located , says Jolliffe , in the hypothalamus -- near the body's temperature , sleep and water-balance controls . Physical exercise raises the appestat . So does cold weather . In moderate doses , alcohol narcotizes the appestat and enhances appetite ( the original reason for the cocktail ) ; ; but because liquor has a high caloric value -- 100 calories per oz. -- the heavy drinker is seldom hungry . In rare cases , diseases such as encephalitis or a pituitary tumor may damage the appestat permanently , destroying nearly all sense of satiety . Food for frustration . Far more frequently , overeating is the result of a psychological compulsion . It may be fostered by frustration , depression , insecurity -- or , in children , simply by the desire to stop an anxious mother's nagging . Some families place undue emphasis on food : conversations center on it , and rich delicacies are offered as rewards , withheld as punishment . The result says Jolliffe : `` The child gains the feeling that food is the purpose of life '' . Food may act as a sedative , giving temporary emotional solace , just as , for some people , alcohol does . Reports Dr. Keys : `` A fairly common experience for us is the wife who finds her husband staying out more and more . He may be interested in another woman , or just like being with the boys . So she fishes around in the cupboard and hauls out a chocolate cake . It's a matter of boredom , and the subconscious feeling that she is entitled to something , because she's being deprived of something else '' . For the army of compulsive eaters -- from the nibblers and the gobblers to the downright gluttons -- reducing is a war with the will that is rarely won . Physiologist Keys flatly dismisses such appetite depressants as the amphetamines ( Benzedrine , Dexedrine ) as dangerous `` crutches for a weak will '' . Keys has no such objections to Metrecal , Quaker Oats's Quota and other 900-calorie milk formulas that are currently winning favor from dieters . `` Metrecal is a pretty complete food '' , he says . `` It contains large amounts of protein , vitamins and minerals . In the quantity of 900 calories a day , anyone will lose weight on it -- 20 , 30 or 40 lbs. '' . But Keys worries that the Metrecal drinker will never make either the psychological or physiological adjustment to the idea of eating smaller portions of food . That remarkable cholesterol . Despite his personal distaste for obesity ( `` disgusting '' ) , Dr. Keys has only an incidental interest in how much Americans eat . What concerns him much more is the relationship of diet to the nation's No. 1 killer : coronary artery disease , which accounts for more than half of all heart fatalities and kills 500,000 Americans a year -- twice the toll from all varieties of cancer , five times the deaths from automobile accidents . Cholesterol , the cornerstone of Dr. Keys's theory , is a mysterious yellowish , waxy substance , chemically a crystalline alcohol . Scientists assume that cholesterol ( from the Greek chole , meaning bile , and sterios , meaning solid ) is somehow necessary for the formation of brain cells , since it accounts for about 2% of the brain's total solid weight . They know it is the chief ingredient in gallstones . They suspect it plays a role in the production of adrenal hormones , and they believe it is essential to the transport of fats throughout the circulatory system . But they cannot fully explain the process of its manufacture by the human liver . Although the fatty protein molecules , carried in the blood and partly composed of cholesterol , are water soluble , cholesterol itself is insoluble , and cannot be destroyed by the body . `` A remarkable substance '' , says Dr. Keys , `` quite apart from its tendency to be deposited in the walls of arteries '' . When thus deposited , Keys says that cholesterol is mainly responsible for the arterial blockages that culminate in heart attacks . Explains Keys : As the fatty protein molecules travel in the bloodstream , they are deposited in the intima , or inner wall of a coronary artery . The proteins and fats are burned off , and the cholesterol is left behind . As cholesterol piles up , it narrows , irritates and damages the artery , encouraging formation of calcium deposits and slowing circulation . Eventually , says Keys , one of two things happens . A clot forms at the site , seals off the flow of blood to the heart and provokes a heart attack . Or ( more commonly , thinks Keys ) the deposits themselves get so big that they choke off the artery's flow to the point that an infarct occurs : the heart muscle is suffocated , cells supplied by the artery die , and the heart is permanently , perhaps fatally injured . Fats & coronaries . Ordinarily , the human liver synthesizes only enough cholesterol to satisfy the body's needs -- for transportation of fats and for production of bile . Even eggs and other cholesterol-rich foods , eaten in normal amounts , says Dr. Keys , do not materially affect the amount of cholesterol in the blood . But fatty foods do . During World War 2 , , doctors in The Netherlands and Scandinavia noted a curious fact : despite the stresses of Nazi occupation , the death rate from coronary artery disease was slowly dropping . Not until long after the war -- 1950 , in fact -- did they get a hint of the reason . That year , Sweden's Haqvin Malmros showed that the sinking death rate neatly coincided with increasingly severe restrictions on fatty foods . That same year the University of California's Dr. Laurance Kinsell , timing oxidation rates of blood fats , stumbled onto the discovery that many vegetable fats cause blood cholesterol levels to drop radically , while animal fats cause them to rise . Here Keys and others , such as Dr. A. E. Ahrens of the Rockefeller Institute , took over to demonstrate the chemical difference between vegetable and animal fats -- and even between different varieties of each . All natural food fats fall into one of three categories -- saturated , mono-unsaturated and poly-unsaturated . The degree of saturation depends on the number of hydrogen atoms on the fat molecule . Saturated fats can accommodate no more hydrogens . Mono-unsaturated fats have room for two more hydrogens on each molecule , and the poly-unsaturated fat molecule has room for at least four hydrogens . The three fats have similar caloric values ( about 265 calories per oz. ) , but each exerts a radically different influence on blood cholesterol . Northern liberals are the chief supporters of civil rights and of integration . They have also led the nation in the direction of a welfare state . And both in their objectives of non-discrimination and of social progress they have had ranged against them the Southerners who are called Bourbons . The name presumably derives from the French royal house which never learned and never forgot ; ; since Bourbon whiskey , though of Kentucky origin , is at least as much favored by liberals in the North as by conservatives in the South . The nature of the opposition between liberals and Bourbons is too little understood in the North . The race problem has tended to obscure other , less emotional , issues which may fundamentally be even more divisive . It is these other differences between North and South -- other , that is , than those which concern discrimination or social welfare -- which I chiefly discuss herein . I write about Northern liberals from considerable personal experience . A Southerner married to a New Englander , I have lived for many years in a Connecticut commuting town with a high percentage of artists , writers , publicity men , and business executives of egghead tastes . Most of them are Democrats and nearly all consider themselves , and are viewed as , liberals . This is puzzling to an outsider conscious of the classic tradition of liberalism , because it is clear that these Democrats who are left-of-center are at opposite poles from the liberal Jefferson , who held that the best government was the least government . Yet paradoxically my liberal friends continue to view Jefferson as one of their patron saints . When I question them as to what they mean by concepts like liberty and democracy , I find that they fall into two categories : the simpler ones who have simply accepted the shibboleths of their faith without analysis ; ; and the intelligent , cynical ones who scornfully reply that these things don't count any more in the world of to-day . I am naive , they say , to make use of such words . I take this to mean that the intelligent -- and therefore necessarily cynical ? ? -- liberal considers that the need for a national economy with controls that will assure his conception of social justice is so great that individual and local liberties as well as democratic processes may have to yield before it . This seems like an attitude favoring a sort of totalitarian bureaucracy which , under a President of the same stamp , would try to coerce an uncooperative Congress or Supreme Court . As for states' rights , they have never counted in the thinking of my liberal friends except as irritations of a minor and immoral nature which exist now only as anachronisms . The American liberal may , in the world of to-day , have a strong case ; ; but he presents it publicly so enmeshed in hypocrisy that it is not an honest one . Why , in the first place , call himself a liberal if he is against laissez-faire and favors an authoritarian central government with womb-to-tomb controls over everybody ? ? If he attaches little importance to personal liberty , why not make this known to the world ? ? And if he is so scornful of the rights of states , why not advocate a different sort of constitution that he could more sincerely support ? ? I am concerned here , however , with the Northern liberal's attitude toward the South . It appears to be one of intense dislike , which he makes little effort to conceal even in the presence of Southern friends . His assumption seems to be that any such friends , being tolerable humans , must be more liberal than most Southerners and therefore at least partly in sympathy with his views . Time's editor , Thomas Griffith , in his book , The Waist-High Culture , wrote : `` most of what was different about it ( the Deep South ) I found myself unsympathetic to . '' This , for the liberals I know , would be an understatement . Theirs is no mere lack of sympathy , but something closer to the passionate hatred that was directed against Fascism . I do not think that my experience would be typical for Southerners living in the North . In business circles , usually conservative , this sort of atmosphere would hardly be found . But in our case -- and neither my wife nor I have extreme views on integration , nor are we given to emotional outbursts -- the situation has ruined one or two valued friendships and come close to wrecking several more . In fact it has caused us to give serious thought to moving our residence south , because it is not easy for the most objective Southerner to sit calmly by when his host is telling a roomful of people that the only way to deal with Southerners who oppose integration is to send in troops and shoot the bastards down . Accounts have been published of Northern liberals in the South up against segregationist prejudice , especially in state-supported universities where pressure may be strong to uphold the majority view . But these accounts do not show that Northerners have been subjected to embarrassment or provocation by Yankee-hatred displayed in social gatherings . From my wife's experience and other sources , this seems to be rarely encountered in educated circles . The strong feeling is certainly there ; ; but there is a leavening of liberalism among college graduates throughout the South , especially among those who studied in the North . And social relations arising out of business ties impose courtesy , if not sympathy , toward resident and visiting Northerners . Also , among the latter a large percentage soon acquire the prevalent Southern attitude on most social problems . There are of course many Souths ; ; but for this discussion the most important division is between those who have been reconstructed and those who haven't . My definition of this much abused adjective is that a reconstructed rebel is one who is glad that the North won the War . Nobody knows how many Southerners there are in this category . I suspect that there are far more unreconstructed ones than the North likes to believe . I never heard of a poll being taken on the question . No doubt such a thing would be considered unpatriotic . Prior to 1954 I imagine that a majority of Southerners would have voted against the Confederacy . Since the Supreme Court's decision of that year this is more doubtful ; ; and if a poll had been taken immediately following the dispatch of troops to Little Rock I believe the majority would have been for the Old South . Belief in the traditional way of life persists much more in the older states than in the new ones . Probably a larger percentage of Virginians and South Carolinians remain unreconstructed than elsewhere , with Georgia , North Carolina , and Alabama following along after them . Old attitudes are held more tenaciously in the Tidewater than the Piedmont ; ; so that a line running down the length of the South marking the upper limits of tidewater would roughly divide the Old South from the new , but with , of course , important minority enclaves . The long-settled areas of states like Virginia and South Carolina developed the ante-bellum culture to its richest flowering , and there the memory is more precious , and the consciousness of loss the greater . Also , we should not even to-day discount the fact that a region such as the coastal lowlands centering on Charleston had closer ties with England and the West Indies than with the North even after independence . The social and psychological consequences of this continue to affect the area . In certain respects defeat increased the persistent Anglophilia of the Old South . Poor where they had once been rich , humbled where they had been arrogant , having no longer any hope of sharing in the leadership of the nation , the rebels who would not surrender in spirit drew comfort from the sympathy they felt extended to them by the mother country . And no doubt many people in states like the Carolinas and Georgia , which were among the most Tory in sentiment in the eighteenth century , bitterly regretted the revolt against the Crown . Among Bourbons the racial issue may have less to do with their remaining unreconstructed than other factors . All Southerners agree that slavery had to go ; ; but many historians maintain that except for Northern meddling it would have ended in states like Virginia years before it did . Southern resentment has been over the method of its ending , the invasion , and Reconstruction ; ; their fears now are of miscegenation and Negro political control in many counties . But apart from racial problems , the old unreconstructed South -- to use the moderate words favored by Mr. Thomas Griffith -- finds itself unsympathetic to most of what is different about the civilization of the North . And this , in effect , means most of modern America . It is hard to see how the situation could be otherwise . And therein , I feel , many Northerners delude themselves about the South . For one thing , this is not a subject often discussed or analyzed . There seems to be almost a conspiracy of silence veiling it . I suppose the reason is a kind of wishful thinking : don't talk about the final stages of Reconstruction and they will take care of themselves . Or else the North really believes that all Southerners except a few quaint old characters have come around to realizing the errors of their past , and are now at heart sharers of the American Dream , like everybody else . If the circumstances are faced frankly it is not reasonable to expect this to be true . The situation of the South since 1865 has been unique in the western world . Regardless of rights and wrongs , a population and an area appropriate to a pre-World-War- 1 great power have been , following conquest , ruled against their will by a neighboring people , and have had imposed upon them social and economic controls they dislike . And the great majority of these people are of Anglo-Saxon or Celtic descent . This is the only case in modern history of a people of Britannic origin submitting without continued struggle to what they view as foreign domination . The fact is due mainly to international wars , both hot and cold . In every war of the United States since the Civil War the South was more belligerent than the rest of the country . So instead of being tests of the South's loyalty , the Spanish War , the two World Wars , and the Korean War all served to overcome old grievances and cement reunion . And there is no section of the nation more ardent than the South in the cold war against Communism . Had the situation been reversed , had , for instance , England been the enemy in 1898 because of issues of concern chiefly to New England , there is little doubt that large numbers of Southerners would have happily put on their old Confederate uniforms to fight as allies of Britain . It is extraordinary that a people as proud and warlike as Southerners should have been as docile as they have . The North should thank its stars that such has been the case ; ; but at the same time it should not draw false inferences therefrom . The two main charges levelled against the Bourbons by liberals is that they are racists and social reactionaries . There is much truth in both these charges , and not many Bourbons deny them . Whatever their faults , they are not hypocrites . Most of them sincerely believe that the Anglo-Saxon is the best race in the world and that it should remain pure . Many Northeners believe this , too , but few of them will say so publicly . The Bourbon economic philosophy , moreover , is not very different from that of Northern conservatives . But those among the Bourbons who remain unreconstructed go much further than this . They believe that if the South had been let alone it would have produced a civilization superior to that of modern America . As it is , they consider that the North is now reaping the fruits of excess egalitarianism , that in spite of its high standard of living the `` American way '' has been proved inferior to the English and Scandinavian ways , although they disapprove of the socialistic features of the latter . The South's antipathy to Northern civilization includes such charges as poor manners , harsh accents , lack of appreciation of the arts of living like gastronomy and the use of leisure . Their own easier , slower tempo is especially dear to Southerners ; ; and I have heard many say that they are content to earn a half or a third as much as they could up North because they so much prefer the quieter habits of their home town . In the past , the duties of the state , as Sir Henry Maine noted long ago , were only two in number : internal order and external security . By prevailing over other claimants for the loyalties of men , the nation-state maintained an adequate measure of certainty and order within its territorial borders . Outside those limits it asserted , as against other states , a position of sovereign equality , and , as against the `` inferior '' peoples of the non-Western world , a position of dominance . It became the sole `` subject '' of `` international law '' ( a term which , it is pertinent to remember , was coined by Bentham ) , a body of legal principle which by and large was made up of what Western nations could do in the world arena . ( That corpus of law was a reflection of the power system in existence during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . Speaking generally , it furthered -- and still tends to further -- the interests of the Western powers . The enormous changes in world politics have , however , thrown it into confusion , so much so that it is safe to say that all international law is now in need of reexamination and clarification in light of the social conditions of the present era . ) Beyond the two basic tasks mentioned above , no attention was paid by statesman or scholar to an idea of state responsibility , either internally or externally . This was particularly true in the world arena , which was an anarchical battleground characterized by strife and avaricious competition for colonial empires . That any sort of duty was owed by his nation to other nations would have astonished a nineteenth-century statesman . His duty was to his sovereign and to his nation , and an extension to peoples beyond the territorial boundaries was not to be contemplated . Thus , to cite but one example , the Pax Britannica of the nineteenth century , whether with the British navy ruling the seas or with the City of London ruling world finance , was strictly national in motivation , however much other nations ( e.g. , the United States ) may have incidentally benefited . At the same time , all suggestions that some sort of societal responsibility existed for the welfare of the people within the territorial state was strongly resisted . Social Darwinism was able to stave off the incipient socialist movement until well into the present century . However , in recent decades , for what doubtless are multiple reasons , an unannounced but nonetheless readily observable shift has occurred in both facets of national activity . A concept of responsibility is in process of articulation and establishment . Already firmly implanted internally , it is a growing factor in external matters . A little more than twenty years ago the American people turned an important corner . In what has aptly been called a `` constitutional revolution '' , the basic nature of government was transformed from one essentially negative in nature ( the `` night-watchman state '' ) to one with affirmative duties to perform . The `` positive state '' came into existence . For lawyers , reflecting perhaps their parochial preferences , there has been a special fascination since then in the role played by the Supreme Court in that transformation -- the manner in which its decisions altered in `` the switch in time that saved nine '' , President Roosevelt's ill-starred but in effect victorious `` Court-packing plan '' , the imprimatur of judicial approval that was finally placed upon social legislation . Of greater importance , however , is the content of those programs , which have had and are having enormous consequences for the American people . Labor relations have been transformed , income security has become a standardized feature of political platforms , and all the many facets of the American version of the welfare state have become part of the conventional wisdom . A national consensus of near unanimity exists that these governmental efforts are desirable as well as necessary . Ratified in the Republican Party victory in 1952 , the Positive State is now evidenced by political campaigns being waged not on whether but on how much social legislation there should be . The general acceptance of the idea of governmental ( i.e. , societal ) responsibility for the economic well-being of the American people is surely one of the two most significant watersheds in American constitutional history . The other , of course , was the Civil War , the conflict which a century ago insured national unity over fragmentation . A third , one of at least equal and perhaps even greater importance , is now being traversed : American immersion and involvement in world affairs . Internal national responsibility , now a truism , need not be documented . Nevertheless , it may be helpful to cite one example -- that of employment -- for , as will be shown below , it cuts across both facets of the new concept . Thirty years ago , while the nation was wallowing in economic depression , the prevailing philosophy of government was to stand aside and allow `` natural forces '' to operate and cure the distress . That guiding principle of the Hoover Administration fell to the siege guns of the New Deal ; ; less than a score of years later Congress enacted the Employment Act of 1946 , by which the national government assumed the responsibility of taking action to insure conditions of maximum employment . Hands-off the economy was replaced by conscious guidance through planning -- the economic side of the constitutional revolution . In 1961 the first important legislative victory of the Kennedy Administration came when the principle of national responsibility for local economic distress won out over a `` state's-responsibility '' proposal -- provision was made for payment for unemployment relief by nation-wide taxation rather than by a levy only on those states afflicted with manpower surplus . The American people have indeed come a long way in the brief interval between 1930 and 1961 . Internal national responsibility is a societal response to the impact of the Industrial Revolution . Reduced to its simplest terms , it is an assumption of a collective duty to compensate for the inability of individuals to cope with the rigors of the era . National responsibility for individual welfare is a concept not limited to the United States or even to the Western nations . A measure of its widespread acceptance may be derived from a statement of the International Congress of Jurists in 1959 . Meeting in New Delhi under the auspices of the International Commission of Jurists , a body of lawyers from the free world , the Congress redefined and expanded the traditional Rule of Law to include affirmative governmental duties . It is noteworthy that the majority of the delegates to the Congress were from the less developed , former colonial nations . The Rule of Law , historically a principle according everyone his `` day in court '' before an impartial tribunal , was broadened substantively by making it a responsibility of government to promote individual welfare . Recognizing that the Rule of Law is `` a dynamic concept which should be employed not only to safeguard the civil and political rights of the individual in a free society '' , the Congress asserted that it also included the responsibility `` to establish social , economic , educational and cultural conditions under which his legitimate aspirations and dignity may be realized '' . The idea of national responsibility thus has become a common feature of the nations of the non-Soviet world . For better or for worse , we all now live in welfare states , the organizing principle of which is collective responsibility for individual well-being . Whether a concept analogous to the principle of internal responsibility operates in a nation's external relations is less obvious and more difficult to establish . The hypothesis ventured here is that it does , and that evidence is accumulating validating that proposition . The content is not the same , however : rather than individual security , it is the security and continuing existence of an `` ideological group '' -- those in the `` free world '' -- that is basic . External national responsibility involves a burgeoning requirement that the leaders of the Western nations so guide their decisions as to further the viability of other friendly nations . If internal responsibility suggests acceptance of the socialist ideal of equality , then external responsibility implies adherence to principles of ideological supranationalism . Reference to two other concepts -- nationalism and sovereignty -- may help to reveal the contours of the new principle . In its beginnings the nation-state had to struggle to assert itself -- internally , against feudal groups , and externally , against the power and influence of such other claimants for loyalty as the Church . The breakup of the Holy Roman Empire and the downfall of feudalism led , not more than two centuries ago , to the surge of nationalism . ( Since the time-span of the nation-state coincides roughly with the separate existence of the United States as an independent entity , it is perhaps natural for Americans to think of the nation as representative of the highest form of order , something permanent and unchanging . ) The concept of nationalism is the political principle that epitomizes and glorifies the territorial state as the characteristic type of socal structure . But it is more than that . For it includes the emotional ties that bind men to their homeland and the complex motivations that hold a large group of people together as a unit . Today , as new nations rise from the former colonial empires , nationalism is one of the hurricane forces loose in the world . Almost febrile in intensity , the principle has become worldwide in application -- unfortunately at the very time that nationalist fervors can wreak greatest harm . Historically , however , the concept is one that has been of marked benefit to the people of the Western civilizational group . By subduing disparate lesser groups the nation has , to some degree at least , broadened the capacity for individual liberty . Within their confines , moreover , technological and industrial growth has proceeded at an accelerated pace , thus increasing the cornucopia from which material wants can be satisfied . While the pattern is uneven , some having gained more than others , nationalism has in fact served the Western peoples well . ( Whether historical nationalism helped the peoples of the remainder of the world , and whether today's nationalism in the former colonial areas has equally beneficial aspects , are other questions . ) It is one of the ironic quirks of history that the viability and usefulness of nationalism and the territorial state are rapidly dissipating at precisely the time that the nation-state attained its highest number ( approximately 100 ) . But it is more than irony : one of the main reasons why nationalism is no longer a tenable concept is because it has spread throughout the planet . In other words , nationalism worked well enough when it had limited application , both as to geography and as to population ; ; it becomes a perilous anachronism when adopted on a world-wide basis . Complementing the political principle of nationalism is the legal principle of sovereignty . The former receives its legitimacy from the latter . Operating side by side , together they helped shore up the nation-state . While sovereignty has roots in antiquity , in its present usage it is essentially modern . Jean Bodin , writing in the sixteenth century , may have been the seminal thinker , but it was the vastly influential John Austin who set out the main lines of the concept as now understood . Austin's nineteenth-century view of law and sovereignty still dominates much of today's legal and political thinking . To him , law is the command of the sovereign ( the English monarch ) who personifies the power of the nation , while sovereignty is the power to make law -- i.e. , to prevail over internal groups and to be free from the commands of other sovereigns in other nations . These fundamental ideas -- the indivisibility of sovereignty and its dual ( internal-external ) aspects -- still remain the core of that concept of ultimate political power . The nation-state , then , exemplifies the principle of nationalism and exercises sovereignty : supreme power over domestic affairs and independence from outside control . In fact , however , both principles have always been nebulous and loosely defined . High-level abstractions are always difficult to pin down with precision . That is particularly true of sovereignty when it is applied to democratic societies , in which `` popular '' sovereignty is said to exist , and in federal nations , in which the jobs of government are split . Nevertheless , nationalism and sovereignty are reputed , in the accepted wisdom , to describe the modern world . Is there a different reality behind the facade ? ? Does the surface hide a quite different picture ? ? The short answer to those questions is `` yes '' . Both concepts are undergoing alteration ; ; to some degree they are being supplanted by a concept of national responsibility . As evidence to support that view , consider the following illustrative instances . Can thermonuclear war be set off by accident ? ? What steps have been taken to guard against the one sort of mishap that could trigger the destruction of continents ? ? Are we as safe as we should be from such a disaster ? ? Is anything being done to increase our margin of safety ? ? Will the danger increase or decrease ? ? I have just asked these questions in the Pentagon , in the White House , in offices of key scientists across the country and aboard the submarines that prowl for months underwater , with neat rows of green launch tubes which contain Polaris missiles and which are affectionately known as `` Sherwood Forest '' . I asked the same questions inside the launch-control rooms of an Atlas missile base in Wyoming , where officers who wear sidearms are manning the `` commit buttons '' that could start a war -- accidentally or by design -- and in the command centers where other pistol-packing men could give orders to push such buttons . To the men in the instrument-jammed bomber cockpits , submarine compartments and the antiseptic , windowless rooms that would be the foxholes of tomorrow's impersonal intercontinental wars , the questions seem farfetched . There is unceasing pressure , but its sources are immediate . `` Readiness exercises '' are almost continuous . Each could be the real thing . In the command centers there are special clocks ready to tick off the minutes elapsed since `` E hour '' . `` E '' stands for `` execution '' -- the moment a `` go order '' would unleash an American nuclear strike . There is little time for the men in the command centers to reflect about the implications of these clocks . They are preoccupied riding herd on control panels , switches , flashing colored lights on pale green or gray consoles that look like business machines . They know little about their machinery beyond mechanical details . Accidental war is so sensitive a subject that most of the people who could become directly involved in one are told just enough so they can perform their portions of incredibly complex tasks . Among the policy makers , generals , physicists , psychologists and others charged with controlling the actions of the button pushers and their `` hardware '' , the answers to my questions varied partly according to a man's flair for what the professionals in this field call `` scenarios '' . As an Air Force psychiatrist put it : `` You can't have dry runs on this one '' . The experts are thus forced to hypothesize sequences of events that have never occurred , probably never will -- but possibly might . Only one rule prevailed in my conversations with these men : The more highly placed they are -- that is , the more they know -- the more concerned they have become . Already accidental war is a silent guest at the discussions within the Kennedy Administration about the urgency of disarmament and nearly all other questions of national security . Only recently new `` holes '' were discovered in our safety measures , and a search is now on for more . Work is under way to see whether new restraining devices should be installed on all nuclear weapons . Meanwhile , the experts speak of wars triggered by `` false pre-emption '' , `` escalation '' , `` unauthorized behavior '' and other terms that will be discussed in this report . They inhabit a secret world centered on `` go codes '' and `` gold phones '' . Their conversations were , almost invariably , accompanied by the same gestures -- arms and pointed forefingers darting toward each other in arclike semicircular motions . One arm represented our bombers and missiles , the other arm `` theirs '' . Yet implicit in each movement was the death of millions , perhaps hundreds of millions , perhaps you and me -- and the experts . These men are not callous . It is their job to think about the unthinkable . Unanimously they believe that the world would become a safer place if more of us -- and more Russians and Communist Chinese , too -- thought about accidental war . The first systematic thinking about this Pandora's box within Pandora's boxes was done four years ago by Fred Ikle , a frail , meek-mannered Swiss-born sociologist . He was , and is , with the RAND Corporation , a nonprofit pool of thinkers financed by the U.S. Air Force . His investigations made him the Paul Revere of accidental war , and safety procedures were enormously increased . In recent weeks , as a result of a sweeping defense policy reappraisal by the Kennedy Administration , basic United States strategy has been modified -- and large new sums allocated -- to meet the accidental-war danger and to reduce it as quickly as possible . The chain starts at BMEWS ( Ballistic Missile Early Warning System ) in Thule , Greenland . Its radar screens would register Soviet missiles shortly after they are launched against the United States . BMEWS intelligence is simultaneously flashed to NORAD ( North American Air Defense Command ) in Colorado Springs , Colorado , for interpretation ; ; to the SAC command and control post , forty-five feet below the ground at Offutt Air Force Base , near Omaha , Nebraska ; ; to the Joint War Room of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the Pentagon and to the President . Telephones , Teletypes , several kinds of radio systems and , in some cases , television , link all vital points . Alternate locations exist for all key command centers . For last-ditch emergencies SAC has alternate command posts on KC-135 jet tankers . Multiple circuits , routings and frequencies make the chain as unbreakable as possible . The same principle of `` redundancy '' applies to all communications on these special networks . And no messages can be transmitted on these circuits until senders and receivers authenticate in advance , by special codes , that the messages actually come from their purported sources . Additional codes can be used to challenge and counterchallenge the authentications . Only the President is permitted to authorize the use of nuclear weapons . That's the law . But what if somebody decides to break it ? ? The President cannot personally remove the safety devices from every nuclear trigger . He makes the momentous decision . Hundreds of men are required to pass the word to the button pushers and to push the buttons . What if one or more of them turn irrational or suddenly , coolly , decide to clobber the Russians ? ? What if the President himself , in the language of the military , `` goes ape '' ? ? Or singlehandedly decided to reverse national policy and hit the Soviets without provocation ? ? Nobody can be absolutely certain of the answers . However , the system is designed , ingeniously and hopefully , so that no one man could initiate a thermonuclear war . Even the President cannot pick up his telephone and give a `` go '' order . Even he does not know the one signal for a nuclear strike -- the `` go code '' . In an emergency he would receive available intelligence on the `` gold-phone circuit '' . A system of `` gold '' -- actually yellow -- phones connects him with the offices and action stations of the Secretary of Defense , the Joint Chiefs of Staff , the SAC commander and other key men . All can be connected with the gold circuit from their homes . All could help the President make his decision . The talk would not be in code , but neither would it ramble . Vital questions would be quickly answered according to a preprepared agenda . Officers who participate in the continual practice drills assured me that the President's decision could be made and announced on the gold circuit within minutes after the first flash from Aj . If communications work , his decision would be instantly known in all command posts that would originate the actual go order . For these centers , too , are on the gold circuit . They include the Navy's Atlantic Command at Norfolk , Virginia , which is in contact with the Polaris subs ; ; NATO headquarters in Europe ; ; Air Force forward headquarters in Europe and in the Pacific , which control tactical fighters on ships and land bases ; ; and SAC , which controls long-range bombers and Atlas missiles . Let us look in on one of these nerve centers -- SAC at Omaha -- and see what must still happen before a wing of B-52 bombers could drop their Aj . In a word , plenty . The key man almost certainly would be Col. William W. Wisman , SAC's senior controller . He or his deputy or one of their seven assistants , all full colonels , mans the heart of the command post twenty-four hours a day . It is a quiet but impressive room -- 140 feet long , thirty-nine feet wide , twenty-one feet high . Movable panels of floor-to-ceiling maps and charts are crammed with intelligence information . And Bill Wisman , forty-three , a farmer's son from Beallsville , Ohio , is a quiet but impressive man . His eyes are steady anchors of the deepest brown . His movements and speech are precise , clear and quick . No question ruffles him or causes him to hesitate . Wisman , who has had the chief controller's job for four years , calls the signals for a team operating three rows of dull-gray consoles studded with lights , switches and buttons . At least a dozen men , some armed , are never far away from him . In front of him is a gold phone . In emergencies the SAC commander , Gen. Thomas Power , or his deputies and their staff would occupy a balcony that stretches across the length of the room above Wisman and his staff . At General Power's seat in the balcony there is also a gold phone . General Power would participate in the decision making . Wisman , below , would listen in and act . His consoles can give him instant contact with more than seventy bases around the world and with every SAC aircraft . He need only pick up one of the two red telephone receivers at his extreme left , right next to the big red button marked alert . ( There are two receivers in case one should be dropped and damaged . ) But Wisman , too , does not know the go code . He must take it from `` the red box '' . In point of fact , this is a beige box with a bright red door , about one and a half feet square and hung from the wall about six feet from the door to Wisman's right . The box is internally wired so the door can never be opened without setting off a screeching klaxon ( `` It's real obnoxious '' ) . Now we must become vague , for we are approaching one of the nation's most guarded secrets . The codes in the red box -- there are several of them covering various contingencies -- are contained in a sealed X-ray-proof `` unique device '' . They are supplied , a batch at a time , by a secret source and are continually changed by Wisman or his staff , at random intervals . But even the contents of Wisman's box cannot start a war . They are mere fragments , just one portion of preprepared messages . What these fragments are and how they activate the go order may not be revealed . The pieces must be placed in the context of the prepared messages by Wisman's staff . In addition to the authentication and acknowledgment procedures which precede and follow the sending of the go messages , again in special codes , each message also contains an `` internal authenticator '' , another specific signal to convince the recipient that he is getting the real thing . I asked Wisman what would happen if he broke out the go codes and tried to start transmitting one . `` I'd wind up full of bullet holes '' , he said , and there was no question that he was talking about bullets fired by his coworkers . Now let us imagine a wing of B-52's , on alert near their `` positive control ( or fail-safe ) points '' , the spots on the map , many miles from Soviet territory , beyond which they are forbidden to fly without specific orders to proceed to their targets . They , too , have fragments of the go code with them . As Wisman put it , `` They have separate pieces of the pie , and we have the whole pie . Once we send out the whole pie , they can put their pieces into it . Unless we send out the whole pie , their pieces mean nothing '' . Why does Wisman's ever-changing code always mesh with the fragments in possession of the button pushers ? ? The answer is a cryptographic secret . At any rate , three men out of a six-man B-52 crew are required to copy down Wisman's go-to-war message . Each must match Wisman's `` pie '' with the fragment that he carries with him . All three must compare notes and agree to `` go '' . After that , it requires several minutes of concentrated work , including six separate and deliberate actions by a minimum of three men sitting at three separate stations in a bomber , each with another man beside him to help , for an armed bomb to be released . Unless all gadgets are properly operated -- and the wires and seals from the handles removed first -- no damage can be done . Suddenly , however , their posture changed and the game ended . They went as rigid as black statuary six figures , lean and tall and angular , went still . Their heads were in the air sniffing . They all swung at the same instant in the same direction . They saw it before I did , even with my binoculars . It was nothing more than a tiny distant rain squall , a dull gray sheet which reached from a layer of clouds to the earth . In the 360 degrees of horizon it obscured only a degree , no more . A white man would not have seen it . The aborigines fastened upon it with a concentration beyond pathos . Watching , they waited until the squall thickened and began to move in a long drifting slant across the dry burning land . At once the whole band set off at a lope . They were chasing a rain cloud . They went after the squall as mercilessly as a wolf pack after an abandoned cow . I followed them in the jeep and now they did not care . The games were over , this was life . Occasionally , for no reason that I could see , they would suddenly alter the angle of their trot . Sometimes I guessed it was because the rain squall had changed direction . Sometimes it was to skirt a gulley . Their gait is impossible to convey in words . It has nothing of the proud stride of the trained runner about it , it is not a lope , it is not done with style or verve . It is the gait of the human who must run to live : arms dangling , legs barely swinging over the ground , head hung down and only occasionally swinging up to see the target , a loose motion that is just short of stumbling and yet is wonderfully graceful . It is a barely controlled skimming of the ground . They ran for three hours . Finally , avoiding hummocks and seeking low ground , they intercepted the rain squall . For ten minutes they ran beneath the squall , raising their arms and , for the first time , shouting and capering . Then the wind died and the rain squall held steady . They were studying the ground . Suddenly one of them shouted , ran a few feet , bent forward and put his mouth to the ground . He had found a depression with rain water in it . He bent down , a black cranelike figure , and put his mouth to the ground . With a lordly and generous gesture , the discoverer stood up and beckoned to the closest of his fellows . The other trotted over and swooped at the tiny puddle . In an instant he had sucked it dry . The aborigine lives on the cruelest land I have ever seen . Which does not mean that it is ugly . Part of it is , of course . There are thousands of square miles of salt pan which are hideous . They are huge areas which have been swept by winds for so many centuries that there is no soil left , but only deep bare ridges fifty or sixty yards apart with ravines between them thirty or forty feet deep and the only thing that moves is a scuttling layer of sand . Such stretches have an inhuman moonlike quality . But much of the land which the aborigine wanders looks as if it should be hospitable . It is softened by the saltbush and the bluebush , has a peaceful quality , the hills roll softly . The malignancy of such a landscape has been beautifully described by the Australian Charles Bean . He tells of three men who started out on a trip across a single paddock , a ten-by-ten-mile square owned by a sheep grazer . They went well-equipped with everything except knowledge of the `` outback '' country . `` The countryside looked like a beautiful open park with gentle slopes and soft gray tree-clumps . Nothing appalling or horrible rushed upon these men . Only there happened -- nothing . There might have been a pool of cool water behind any of these tree-clumps : only -- there was not . It might have rained , any time ; ; only -- it did not . There might have been a fence or a house just over the next rise ; ; only -- there was not . They lay , with the birds hopping from branch to branch above them and the bright sky peeping down at them . No one came '' . The white men died . And countless others like them have died . Even today range riders will come upon mummified bodies of men who attempted nothing more difficult than a twenty-mile hike and slowly lost direction , were tortured by the heat , driven mad by the constant and unfulfilled promise of the landscape , and who finally died . The aborigine is not deceived ; ; he knows that the land is hard and pitiless . He knows that the economy of life in the `` outback '' is awful . There is no room for error or waste . Any organism that falters or misperceives the signals or weakens is done . I do not know if such a way of life can come to be a self-conscious challenge , but I suspect that it can . Perhaps this is what gives the aborigine his odd air of dignity . The family at the boulder seeing an aborigine today is a difficult thing . Many of them have drifted into the cities and towns and seaports . Others are confined to vast reservations , and not only does the Australian government justifiably not wish them to be viewed as exhibits in a zoo , but on their reservations they are extremely fugitive , shunning camps , coming together only for corroborees at which their strange culture comes to its highest pitch -- which is very low indeed . I persuaded an Australian friend who had lived `` outback '' for years to take me to see some aborigines living in the bush . It was a difficult and ambiguous kind of negotiation , even though the rancher was said to be expert in his knowledge of the aborigines and their language . Finally , however , the arrangements were made and we drove out into the bush in a Land Rover . We followed the asphalt road for a few miles and then swung off onto a smaller road which was nothing more than two tire marks on the earth . The rancher went a mile down this road and then , when he reached a big red boulder , swung off the road . At once he started to glance toward the instrument panel . It took me a moment to realize what was odd about that panel : there was a gimbaled compass welded to it , which rocked gently back and forth as the Land Rover bounced about . The rancher was navigating his way across the flatland . `` Do you always navigate like this '' ? ? I asked . `` Damned right '' , he said . `` Once I get out on the flat I do . Some chaps that know an area well can make their way by landmarks , a tree here , a wash here , a boulder there . But if you don't know the place like the palm of your hand , you'd better use a compass and the speedometer . Two miles northeast , then five miles southwest that sort of thing . Very simple '' . He was right . The landscape kept repeating itself . I would try to memorize landmarks and saw in a half-hour that it was hopeless . Finally we approached the bivouac of the aborigines . They were camped beside a large column-shaped boulder : a man , his lubra , and two children . The sun was not yet high and all of them were in the small area of shade cast by the boulder . There was also a dog , a dingo dog . Its ribs showed , it was a yellow nondescript color , it suffered from a variety of sores , hair had scabbed off its body in patches . It lay with its head on its paws and only its eyes moving , watching us carefully . It struck me as a very bright and very malnourished dog . No one patted the dog . It was not a pet . It was a worker . `` The buggers love shade '' , the rancher said . `` I suppose because it saves them some loss of body water . They'll move around that rock all day , following the shade . During the hottest part of the day , of course , the sun comes straight down and there isn't any shade '' . We drove close to the boulder , stopped the Land Rover , and walked over toward the family . The man was leaning against the rock . He gazed away from us as we approached . He was over six feet tall and very thin . His legs were narrow and very long . Every bone and muscle in his body showed , but he did not give the appearance of starving . He had long black hair and a wispy beard . The ridges over his eyes were huge and his eyelids were half shut . There was something about his face that disturbed me and it took several seconds to realize what . It was not merely that flies were crawling over his face but his narrowed eyelids did not blink when the flies crawled into his eye sockets . A fly would crawl down the bulging forehead , into the socket of the eye , walk along the man's lashes and across the wet surface of the eyeball , and the eye did not blink . The Australian and I both were wearing insect repellent and were not badly bothered by insects , but my eyes watered as we stood watching the aborigine . I turned to look at the lubra . She remained squatting on her heels all the time we were there ; ; like the man , she was entirely naked . Her long thin arms moved in a slow rhythmical gesture over the family possessions which were placed in front of her . There were two rubbing sticks for making fire , two stones shaped roughly like knives , a woven-root container which held a few pounds of dried worms and the dead body of some rodent . There was also a long wooden spear and a woomera , a spear-throwing device which gives the spear an enormous velocity and high accuracy . There was also a boomerang , elaborately carved . Everything was burnished with sweat and grease so that all of the objects seemed to have been carved from the same material and to be ageless . The two children , both boys , wandered around the Australian and me for a few moments and then returned to their work . They squatted on their heels with their heads bent far forward , their eyes only a few inches from the ground . They had located the runway of a colony of ants and as the ants came out of the ground , the boys picked them up , one at a time , and pinched them dead . The tiny bodies , dropped onto a dry leaf , made a pile as big as a small apple . The odor here was more powerful than that which surrounded the town aborigines . The smell at first was more surprising than unpleasant . It was also subtly familiar , for it was the odor of the human body , but multiplied innumerable times because of the fact that the aborigines never bathed . One's impulse is to say that the smell was a stink and unpleasant . But that is a cliche and a dishonest one . The smell is sexual , but so powerfully so that a civilized nose must deny it . Their skin was covered with a thin coating of sweat and dirt which had almost the consistency of a second skin . They roll at night in ashes to keep warm and their second skin has a light dusty cast to it . In spots such as the elbows and knees the second skin is worn off and I realized the aborigines were much darker than they appeared ; ; as if the coating of sweat , dirt , and ashes were a cosmetic . The boys had beautiful dark eyes and unlike their father they brushed constantly at the flies and blinked their eyes . `` That smell is something , eh , mate '' ? ? The Australian asked . `` They swear that every person smells different and every family smells different from every other . At the corroborees , when they get to dancing and sweating , you'll see them rubbing up against a man who's supposed to have a specially good smell . Idje , here '' , and he nodded at the man , `` is said to have great odor . The stink is all the same to me , but I really think they can make one another out blindfolded '' . `` Here , Idje , you fella like tabac '' ? ? He said sharply . Idje still stared over our shoulders at the horizon . The Australian stopped trying to talk a pidgin I could understand , and spoke strange words from deep in his chest . It was a fortunate time in which to build , for the seventeenth century was a great period in Persian art . The architects , the tile and carpet makers , the potters , painters , calligraphers , and metalsmiths worked through Abbas's reign and those of his successors to enrich the city . Travelers entering from the desert were confounded by what must have seemed an illusion : a great garden filled with nightingales and roses , cut by canals and terraced promenades , studded with water tanks of turquoise tile in which were reflected the glistening blue curves of a hundred domes . At the heart of all of this was the square , which one such traveler declared to be `` as spacious , as pleasant and aromatick a Market as any in the Universe '' . In time Isfahan came to be known as `` half the world '' , Isfahan nisf-i-jahan . In the early eighteenth century this fantastic city , then the size of London , started to decline . The Afghans invaded ; ; the Safavids fell from power ; ; the capital went elsewhere ; ; the desert encroached . Isfahan became more of a legend than a place , and now it is for many people simply a name to which they attach their notions of old Persia and sometimes of the East . They think of it as a kind of spooky museum in which they may half see and half imagine the old splendor . Those who actually get there find that it isn't spooky at all but as brilliant as a tile in sunlight . But even for them it remains a museum , or perhaps it would be more accurate to say a tomb , a tomb in which Persia lies well preserved but indeed dead . Everyone is ready to grant the Persians their history , but almost no one is willing to acknowledge their present . It seems that for Persia , and especially for this city , there are only two times : the glorious past and the corrupt , depressing , sterile present . The one apparent connection between the two is a score of buildings which somehow or other have survived and which naturally enough are called `` historical monuments '' . However , just as all the buildings have not fallen and flowed back to their original mud , so the values which wanted them and saw that they were built have not all disappeared . The values and talents which made the tile and the dome , the rug , the poem and the miniature , continue in certain social institutions which rise above the ordinary life of this city , as the great buildings rise above blank walls and dirty lanes . Often , too , the social institutions are housed in these pavilions and palaces and bridges , for these great structures are not simply `` historical monuments '' ; ; they are the places where Persians live . The promenade , for example , continues to take place on the Chahar Bagh , a mile-long garden of plane and poplar trees that now serves as the city's principal street . It takes place as well along the terraces and through the arcades of the Khaju bridge , and also in the gardens of the square . On Fridays , the day when many Persians relax with poetry , talk , and a samovar , people do not , it is true , stream into Chehel Sotun -- a pavilion and garden built by Shah Abbas 2 , in the seventeenth century -- but they do retire into hundreds of pavilions throughout the city and up the river valley , which are smaller , more humble copies of the former . And of course religious life continues to center in the more famous mosques , and commercial life -- very much a social institution -- in the bazaar . Those three other great activities of the Persians , the bath , the teahouse , and the zur khaneh ( the latter a kind of club in which a leader and a group of men in an octagonal pit move through a rite of calisthenics , dance , chanted poetry , and music ) , do not take place in buildings to which entrance tickets are sold , but some of them occupy splendid examples of Persian domestic architecture : long , domed , chalk-white rooms with daises of turquoise tile , their end walls cut through to the orchards and the sky by open arches . But more important , and the thing which the casual traveler and the blind sojourner often do not see , is that these places and activities are often the settings in which Persians exercise their extraordinary aesthetic sensibilities . Water , air , fruit , poetry , music , the human form -- these things are important to Persians , and they experience them with an intense and discriminating awareness . I should like , by the way , to make it clear that I am not using the word `` Persians '' carelessly . I don't mean a few aesthetes who play about with sensations , like a young prince in a miniature dabbling his hand in a pool . These things are important to almost all Persians and perhaps most important to the most ordinary . The men crying love poems in an orchard on any summer's night are as often as not the lutihaw , mustachioed toughs who spend most of their lives in and out of the local prisons , brothels , and teahouses . A few months ago it was a fairly typical landlord who in the dead of night lugged me up a mountainside to drink from a spring famous in the neighborhood for its clarity and flavor . Not long ago an acquaintance , a slick-headed water rat of a lad up from the maw of the city , stood on the balcony puffing his first cigarette in weeks . The air , he said , was just right ; ; a cigarette would taste particularly good . I really didn't know what he meant . It was a nice day , granted . But he knew ; ; he sniffed the air and licked it on his lip and knew as a vintner knows a vintage . The natural world then , plus poetry and some kinds of art , receives from the most ordinary of Persians a great deal of attention . The line of an eyebrow , the color of the skin , a ghazal from Hafiz , the purity of spring water , the long afternoon among the boughs which crowd the upper story of a pavilion -- these things are noticed , judged , and valued . Nowhere in Isfahan is this rich aesthetic life of the Persians shown so well as during the promenade at the Khaju bridge . There has probably always been a bridge of some sort at the southeastern corner of the city . For one thing , there is a natural belt of rock across the river bed ; ; for another , it was here that one of the old caravan routes came in . It was to provide a safe and spacious crossing for these caravans , and also to make a pleasance for the city , that Shah Abbas 2 , in about 1657 built , of sun-baked brick , tile , and stone , the present bridge . It is a splendid structure . From upstream it looks like a long arcaded box laid across the river ; ; from downstream , where the water level is much lower , it is a high , elaborately facaded pavilion . The top story contains more than thirty alcoves separated from each other by spandrels of blue and yellow tile . At either end and in the center there are bays which contain nine greater alcoves as frescoed and capacious as church apses . Here , in the old days -- when they had come to see the moon or displays of fireworks -- sat the king and his court while priests , soldiers , and other members of the party lounged in the smaller alcoves between . Below , twenty vaults tunnel through the understructure of the bridge . These are traversed by another line of vaults , and thus rooms , arched on all four sides , are formed . Down through the axis of the bridge there is a long diminishing vista like a visual echo of piers and arches , while the vaults fronting upstream and down frame the sunset and sunrise , the mountains and river pools . Here , on the hottest day , it is cool beneath the stone and fresh from the water flowing in the sluices at the bottom of the vaults . On the downstream , or `` pavilion '' , side these vaults give out onto terraces twice as wide as the bridge itself . From the terraces -- eighteen in all -- broad flights of steps descend into the water or onto still more terraces barely above the level of the river . Out of water , brick , and tile they have made far more than just a bridge . On spring and summer evenings people leave their shops and houses and walk up through the lanes of the city to the bridge . It is a great spectacle . The bridge itself rises up from the river , light-flared and enormous , like the outdoor set for an epic opera . Crowds press along the terraces , down the steps , in and out of the arcades , massing against it as though it were a fortress under siege . All kinds come to walk in the promenade : merchants from the bazaar bickering over a deal ; ; a Bakhtiari khan in a cap and hacking jacket ; ; dervishes who stand with the stillness of the blind , their eyes filmed with rheum and visions ; ; the old Kajar princes arriving in their ancient limousines ; ; students , civil servants , beggars , musicians , hawkers , and clowns . Families go out to the edge of the terraces to sit on carpets around a samovar . Below , people line the steps , as though on bleachers , to watch the sky and river . Above , in the tiled prosceniums of the alcoves , boys sing the ghazals of Hafiz and Saadi , while at the very bottom , in the vaults , the toughs and blades of the city hoot and bang their drums , drink arak , play dice , and dance . Here in an evening Persians enjoy many of the things which are important to them : poetry , water , the moon , a beautiful face . To a stranger their delight in these things may seem paradoxical , for Persians chase the golden calf as much as any people . Many of them , moreover , are beginning to complain about the scarcity of Western amusements and to ridicule the old life of the bazaar merchant , the mullah , and the peasant . Nonetheless , they take time out -- much time -- from the game of grab and these new Western experiments to go to the gardens and riverbanks . Above all , they will stop in the middle of anything , anywhere , to hear or quote some poetry . Poetry in Persian life is far more than a common ground on which -- in a society deeply fissured by antagonisms -- all may stand . It contains , in fact , their whole outlook on life . And it is expressed , at least to their taste , in a perfect form . Poetry for a Persian is nothing less than truth and beauty . In most Western cultures today these twins have been sent away to the libraries and museums . In Persia , where practically speaking there are no museums or libraries or , for that matter , hardly any books , the twins run free . It is perhaps difficult to conceive , but imagine that tonight on London bridge the Teddy boys of the East End will gather to sing Marlowe , Herrick , Shakespeare , and perhaps some lyrics of their own . That , at any rate , is what happens at the Khaju bridge . Boys and men go along the riverbank or to the alcoves in the top arcade . Here in these little rooms -- or stages arched open to the sky and river -- they choose a few lines out of the hundreds they may know and sing them according to one of the modes into which Persian music is divided . Each mode is believed to have a specific attribute -- one inducing pleasure , another generosity , another love , and so on , to include all of the emotions . The singer simply matches the poem to a mode ; ; for example , the mode of bravery to this anonymous folk poem : `` They brought me news that Spring is in the plains And Ahmad's blood the crimson tulip stains ; ; Go , tell his aged mother that her son Fought with a thousand foes , and he was one '' . Or the mode of love to this fragment by a recent poet : `` Know ye , fair folk who dwell on earth Or shall hereafter come to birth , That here , with dust upon his eyes , Iraj , the sweet-tongued singer , lies . In this true lover's tomb interred A world of love lies sepulchred . '' These songs ( practically all Persian music , for that matter ) are limited to a range of two octaves . Yet within this limitation there is an astonishing variety : design as intricate as that in the carpet or miniature , with the melodic line like the painted or woven line often flowing into an arabesque . Die Frist ist um , und wiederum verstrichen sind sieben Jahr , the Maestro quoted The Flying Dutchman , as he told of his career and wanderings , explaining that the number seven had significantly recurred in his life several times . The music director of the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra , William Steinberg , has molded his group into a prominent musical organization , which is his life . When he added to his Pittsburgh commitments the directorship of the London Philharmonic Orchestra in 1958 , he conducted one hundred fifty concerts within nine months , `` commuting '' between the two cities . This schedule became too strenuous , even for the energetic and conscientious Mr. Steinberg . His London contract was rescinded , and now , he explains cheerfully , as a bright smile lightens his intense , mobile face , `` I conduct only one hundred and twenty concerts '' ! ! Our meeting took place in May , 1961 , during one of the Maestro's stop-overs in New York , before he left for Europe . As we began to converse in the lounge of his Fifth Avenue hotel , his restlessness and sensitivity to light and sound became immediately apparent . Seeking an obscure , dark , relatively quiet corner in the airy room otherwise suffused with afternoon sunshine , he asked if the soft background music could be turned off . Unfortunately , it was Muzak , which automatically is piped into the public rooms , and which nolens volens had to be endured . As he talked about himself , time and again stuffing and dragging on his pipe , Steinberg began to relax and the initial hurried feeling grew faint and was dispelled . Did he come from a musical family ? ? Yes : though not professional musicians , they were a music-loving family . In his native Cologne , where his mother taught him to play the piano , he was able to read notes before he learned the alphabet . She even devised a system of colors , whereby the boy could easily distinguish the different note values . When he started school at the age of five-and-a-half , he could not understand why the alphabet begins with the letter A , instead of C , as in the scale . Because , like many other children , he intensely disliked practicing Czerny Etudes , he composed his own studies . When he was eight he began violin lessons . Soon he was playing in the Cologne Municipal Orchestra , and during World War 1 , , when musicians were scarce , he joined the opera orchestra as well . Steinberg claims that these early years of orchestra participation were of invaluable help to his career . `` By observing the conductor '' , he says with a twinkle in his eyes , `` I learned how not to conduct '' . The musician ran away from school when he was fifteen , but this escapade did not save him from the Gymnasium . Simultaneously , he pursued his musical studies at the conservatory , receiving sound training in counterpoint and harmony , as well in the violin and piano . His professional career began when he was twenty ; ; he became Otto Klemperer's personal assistant at the Cologne Opera , and a year later was promoted to the position of regular conductor . Wasn't this an unusually young age to fill such a responsible post ? ? Yes , the Maestro assented . Had he always wished to be a conductor ? ? No , originally he had hoped to become a concert pianist and had even performed as such . However , when he assumed the duties of a conductor , he relinquished his career as a pianist . Five years were spent with the Cologne Opera , after which he was called to Prague by Alexander von Zemlinsky , teacher of Arnold Schonberg and Erich Korngold . In 1927 he succeeded Zemlinsky as opera director of the German Theater at Prague . During his tenure he also fulfilled guest engagements at the Berlin State Opera . Two years later he became director of the Frankfurt Opera , where he remained until he lost this position in 1933 through the rise of the Hitler regime . During these years the youthful conductor had contributed greatly to the high level of musical life in Germany . He had presented the first German performances of Puccini's Manon Lescaut and De Falla's La Vida Breve . The Frankfurt years were particularly noteworthy for his performance of Berg's Wozzek soon after the Berlin premiere under Erich Kleiber , and the world premiere of Schonberg's Von heute auf morgen . At the outset of his career , Steinberg had dedicated himself to the advancement of contemporary music by vowing to do a Schonberg work every year . In Frankfurt , too , he directed the Museum and Opera House concerts which , in addition to the standard repertoire , featured novelties like Erdmann's Piano Concerto and Mahler's Sixth Symphony . Because of the political upheaval in Germany in the 1930's , Steinberg was forced to restrict his activities to the Jewish community . Through the Frankfurt Jewish Kulturbund he began to give sonata recitals in synagogues , with Cellist Emanuel Feuermann . As more and more Jewish musicians lost their jobs with professional organizations Steinberg united them into the Frankfurt Kulturbund Orchestra , which also gave guest performances in other German cities . In 1936 he accepted the leadership of the Berlin Kulturbund . In the fall of that year the best musicians of the Berlin and Frankfurt Kulturbund orchestras joined under the combined efforts of Bronislaw Hubermann and Steinberg to become the Palestine Orchestra -- now known as the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra -- with Steinberg as founder-conductor . In 1938 , at the insistence of Arturo Toscanini , Steinberg left Germany for the United States , by way of Switzerland . After he had spent the first three years in New York as associate conductor , at Toscanini's invitation , of the NBC Orchestra , he made numerous guest appearances throughout the United States and Latin America . In 1945 he became conductor of the Buffalo Philharmonic . Seven years later he was asked to become director of the Pittsburgh Symphony . Since 1944 he has also conducted regularly at the San Francisco Opera , where he made his debut with a memorable performance of Verdi's Falstaff . In recent years he has traveled widely in Europe , conducting in Italy , France , Austria , and Switzerland . He returned to Germany for the first time in 1953 , where he has since conducted in Cologne , Frankfurt , and Berlin . Where in Europe was he going now ? ? First of all , to Italy for a short vacation -- Forte Dei Marmi , a place he loves . Since it is not far from Viareggio , he will visit Puccini's house , as he never fails to do , to pay his respects to the memory of the composer of La Boheme , which he considers one of Puccini's masterpieces . Steinberg spoke with warmth and enthusiasm about Italy : `` Rome is my second home . I consider it the center of the world and make it a point to be there once a year '' . He will conduct two concerts at the Accademia Di Santa Cecilia , as well as concerts in Munich and Cologne . `` Then I return to the United States for engagements at the Hollywood Bowl and in Philadelphia '' , he added . The forthcoming season in Pittsburgh also promises to be of unusual interest . There will be premieres of new works , made possible through Ford Foundation commissions : Carlisle Floyd's Mystery , with Phyllis Curtin as soprano soloist . Other world premieres will be Gardner Read's Third Symphony and Burle Marx's Samba Concertante . `` And next year we will do -- also a Ford commission -- a piano concerto by Elliott Carter , with Jacob Lateiner as soloist . Of course , I shall conduct Mahler and Bruckner works in the coming season , as usual . We'll play Bruckner's Fifth Symphony in the original version , and Mahler's Seventh -- the least accessible , known , and played of Mahler's works . My Pittsburghers have become real addicts to Mahler and Bruckner '' . He added that he also stresses the works of these favorite masters on tour , especially Mahler's First and Fourth symphonies , and Das Lied Von der Erde , and Bruckner's Sixth -- which is rarely played -- and Seventh . Bruckner's Eighth he refers to as `` my travel symphony '' . He recalled that in California after a critic had attacked him for `` still trying to sell Bruckner to the Americans '' , the public's response at the next concert was a standing ovation . `` Now that Bruno Walter is virtually in retirement and my dear friend Dimitri Mitropoulos is no longer with us , I am probably the only one -- with the possible exception of Leonard Bernstein -- who has this special affinity for and champions the works of Bruckner and Mahler '' . Since he introduces so much modern music , I could not resist asking how he felt about it . `` There was always and at all times a contemporary music and it expresses the era in which it was created . But I usually stick to the old phrase : ' Ich habe ein Amt , aber keine Meinung ( I hold an office , but I do not feel entitled to have an opinion ) . I consider it to be my job to expose the public to what is being written today '' . With all his musical activities , did he have the time and inclination to do anything else ? ? He had just paid a brief visit to the Frick Collection to admire his favorite paintings by Rembrandt and Franz Hals . He was not enthusiastic over the newly acquired Claude Lorrain , but reminisced with pleasure over a Poussin exhibit he had been able to see in Paris a year ago . And how did he feel about modern art ? ? Again Steinberg was cautious and replied with a smile that he was not exposed to it enough to hazard comments . `` As my wife puts it '' , he said , again with a twinkle in his eyes , `` all you know is your music . But after all , you never learned anything else '' ! ! What did he do for relaxation ? ? Like his late colleague , Mitropoulos , he reads mystery stories , in particular Sir Arthur Conan Doyle . He cited Heine and Stendhal as favorites in literature . But his prime interest , apart from music , he insisted seriously , was his family -- his wife , daughter and son . At the moment he was excited about his son's having received the Prix De Rome in archaeology and was looking forward to being present this summer at the excavation of an Etruscan tomb . `` Both children are musical and my wife is a music lover of unfailing instinct and judgement '' . `` Is the attitude of German youth comparable to that of `` the angry young men ' of England '' ? ? Was the topic for a round-table discussion at the Bayerische Rundfunk in Munich . I was chairman , the only not youthful participant . Since attack serves to stimulate interest in broadcasts , I added to my opening statement a sentence in which I claimed that German youth seemed to lack the enthusiasm which is a necessary ingredient of anger , and might be classified as uninterested and bored rather than angry . I was far from convinced of the truth of my statement , but could not think of anything that might evoke responses more quickly . `` It is easy for you to talk '' ; ; countered a twenty year old law student , `` you travel around the world . We would like to do that too '' . `` But you want a job guaranteed when you return '' , I continued my attack . `` You must have some security '' , said a young clerk . When I mentioned that for my first long voyage I did not even have the money for the return fare , but had trusted to luck that I would earn a sufficient amount , the young people looked at me doubtingly . One girl expressed what was obviously in their minds . `` Would you advise us to act the same way ? ? You might have failed . I think it is rather foolhardy to trust to luck '' . Others mentioned that I might have had to ask friends or even strangers for help and that to be stranded in a foreign country without sufficient funds did not contribute to international understanding . The debate needed no additional controversy and soon I could ask each individually what he expected from life , what his hopes were and what his fears . Though the four boys and two girls , the youngest nineteen years of age , the oldest twenty-four , came from varying backgrounds and had different professional and personal interests , there was surprising agreement among them . What they wished for most was security ; ; what they feared most was war or political instability in their own country . The ideal home , they agreed , would be a small private house or a city apartment of four to five rooms , just enough for a family consisting of husband , wife , and two children . No one wanted a larger family or no children , and none hoped for a castle or said that living in less settled circumstances would be satisfactory . All expressed interest in world affairs but no one offered to make any sacrifices to satisfy this interest . Once again , as in the days of the Founding Fathers , America faces a stern test . That test , as President Kennedy forthrightly depicted it in his State of the Union message , will determine `` whether a nation organized and governed such as ours can endure '' . It is well then that in this hour both of `` national peril '' and of `` national opportunity '' we can take counsel with the men who made the nation . Incapable of self-delusion , the Founding Fathers found the crisis of their time to be equally grave , and yet they had confidence that America would surmount it and that a republic of free peoples would prosper and serve as an example to a world aching for liberty . Seven Founders -- George Washington , Benjamin Franklin , John Adams , Thomas Jefferson , Alexander Hamilton , James Madison and John Jay -- determined the destinies of the new nation . In certain respects , their task was incomparably greater than ours today , for there was nobody before them to show them the way . As Madison commented to Jefferson in 1789 , `` We are in a wilderness without a single footstep to guide us . Our successors will have an easier task '' . They thought of themselves , to use Jefferson's words , as `` the Argonauts '' who had lived in `` the Heroic Age '' . Accordingly , they took special pains to preserve their papers as essential sources for posterity . Their writings assume more than dramatic or patriotic interest because of their conviction that the struggle in which they were involved was neither selfish nor parochial but , rather , as Washington in his last wartime circular reminded his fellow countrymen , that `` with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be involved '' . Strong men with strong opinions , frank to the point of being refreshingly indiscreet , the Founding Seven were essentially congenial minds , and their agreements with each other were more consequential than their differences . Even though in most cases the completion of the definitive editions of their writings is still years off , enough documentation has already been assembled to warrant drawing a new composite profile of the leadership which performed the heroic dual feats of winning American independence and founding a new nation . Before merging them into a common profile it is well to remember that their separate careers were extraordinary . Certainly no other seven American statesmen from any later period achieved so much in so concentrated a span of years . Eldest of the seven , Benjamin Franklin , a New Englander transplanted to Philadelphia , wrote the most dazzling success story in our history . The young printer's apprentice achieved greatness in a half-dozen different fields , as editor and publisher , scientist , inventor , philanthropist and statesman . Author of the Albany Plan Of Union , which , had it been adopted , might have avoided the Revolution , he fought the colonists' front-line battles in London , negotiated the treaty of alliance with France and the peace that ended the war , headed the state government of Pennsylvania , and exercised an important moderating influence at the Federal Convention . On a military mission for his native Virginia the youthful George Washington touched off the French and Indian War , then guarded his colony's frontier as head of its militia . Commanding the Continental Army for six long years of the Revolution , he was the indispensable factor in the ultimate victory . Retiring to his beloved Mount Vernon , he returned to preside over the Federal Convention , and was the only man in history to be unanimously elected President . During his two terms the Constitution was tested and found workable , strong national policies were inaugurated , and the traditions and powers of the Presidential office firmly fixed . John Adams fashioned much of pre-Revolutionary radical ideology , wrote the constitution of his home state of Massachusetts , negotiated , with Franklin and Jay , the peace with Britain and served as our first Vice President and our second President . His political opponent and lifetime friend , Thomas Jefferson , achieved immortality through his authorship of the Declaration of Independence , but equally notable were the legal and constitutional reforms he instituted in his native Virginia , his role as father of our territorial system , and his acquisition of the Louisiana Territory during his first term as President . During the greater part of Jefferson's career he enjoyed the close collaboration of a fellow Virginian , James Madison , eight years his junior . The active sponsor of Jefferson's measure for religious liberty in Virginia , Madison played the most influential single role in the drafting of the Constitution and in securing its ratification in Virginia , founded the first political party in American history , and , as Jefferson's Secretary of State and his successor in the Presidency , guided the nation through the troubled years of our second war with Britain . If Franklin was an authentic genius , then Alexander Hamilton , with his exceptional precocity , consuming energy , and high ambition , was a political prodigy . His revolutionary pamphlets , published when he was only 19 , quickly brought him to the attention of the patriot leaders . Principal author of `` The Federalist '' , he swung New York over from opposition to the Constitution to ratification almost single-handedly . His collaboration with Washington , begun when he was the general's aide during the Revolution , was resumed when he entered the first Cabinet as Secretary of the Treasury . His bold fiscal program and his broad interpretation of the Constitution stand as durable contributions . Less dazzling than Hamilton , less eloquent than Jefferson , John Jay commands an equally high rank among the Founding Fathers . He served as president of the Continental Congress . He played the leading role in negotiating the treaty with Great Britain that ended the Revolution , and directed America's foreign affairs throughout the Confederation period . As first Chief Justice , his strong nationalist opinions anticipated John Marshall . He ended his public career as a two-term governor of New York . These Seven Founders constituted an intellectual and social elite , the most respectable and disinterested leadership any revolution ever confessed . Their social status was achieved in some cases by birth , as with Washington , Jefferson and Jay ; ; in others by business and professional acumen , as with Franklin and Adams , or , in Hamilton's case , by an influential marriage . Unlike so many of the power-starved intellectuals in underdeveloped nations of our own day , they commanded both prestige and influence before the Revolution started . As different physically as the tall , angular Jefferson was from the chubby , rotund Adams , the seven were striking individualists . Ardent , opinionated , even obstinate , they were amazingly articulate , wrote their own copy , and were masters of phrasemaking . Capable of enduring friendships , they were also stout controversialists , who could write with a drop of vitriol on their pens . John Adams dismissed John Dickinson , who voted against the Declaration of Independence , as `` a certain great fortune and piddling genius '' . Washington castigated his critic , General Conway , as being capable of `` all the meanness of intrigue to gratify the absurd resentment of disappointed vanity '' . And Hamilton , who felt it `` a religious duty '' to oppose Aaron Burr's political ambitions , would have been a better actuarial risk had he shown more literary restraint . The Seven Founders were completely dedicated to the public service . Madison once remarked : `` My life has been so much a public one '' , a comment which fits the careers of the other six . Franklin retired from editing and publishing at the age of 42 , and for the next forty-two years devoted himself to public , scientific , and philanthropic interests . Washington never had a chance to work for an extended stretch at the occupation he loved best , plantation management . He served as Commander in Chief during the Revolution without compensation . John Adams took to heart the advice given him by his legal mentor , Jeremiah Gridley , to `` pursue the study of the law , rather than the gain of it '' . In taking account of seventeen years of law practice , Adams concluded that `` no lawyer in America ever did so much business as I did '' and `` for so little profit '' . When the Revolution broke out , he , along with Jefferson and Jay , abandoned his career at the bar , with considerable financial sacrifice . Hamilton , poorest of the seven , gave up a brilliant law practice to enter Washington's Cabinet . While he was handling the multi-million-dollar funding operations of the Government he had to resort to borrowing small sums from friends . `` If you can conveniently let me have twenty dollars '' , he wrote one friend in 1791 when he was Secretary of the Treasury . To support his large family Hamilton went back to the law after each spell of public service . Talleyrand passed his New York law office one night on the way to a party . Hamilton was bent over his desk , drafting a legal paper by the light of a candle . The Frenchman was astonished . `` I have just come from viewing a man who had made the fortune of his country , but now is working all night in order to support his family '' , he reflected . All seven combined ardent devotion to the cause of revolution with a profound respect for legality . John Adams asserted in the Continental Congress' Declaration of Rights that the demands of the colonies were in accordance with their charters , the British Constitution and the common law , and Jefferson appealed in the Declaration of Independence `` to the tribunal of the world '' for support of a revolution justified by `` the laws of nature and of nature's God '' . They fought hard , but they were forgiving to former foes , and sought to prevent vindictive legislatures from confiscating Tory property in violation of the Treaty of 1783 . This sense of moderation and fairness is superbly exemplified in an exchange of letters between John Jay and a Tory refugee , Peter Van Schaack . Jay had participated in the decision that exiled his old friend Van Schaack . Yet when , at war's end , the ex-Tory made the first move to resume correspondence , Jay wrote him from Paris , where he was negotiating the peace settlement : `` As an independent American I considered all who were not for us , and you amongst the rest , as against us , yet be assured that John Jay never ceased to be the friend of Peter Van Schaack '' . The latter in turn assured him that `` were I arraigned at the bar , and you my judge , I should expect to stand or fall only by the merits of my cause '' . All seven recognized that independence was but the first step toward building a nation . `` We have now a national character to establish '' , Washington wrote in 1783 . `` Think continentally '' , Hamilton counseled the young nation . This new force , love of country , super-imposed upon -- if not displacing -- affectionate ties to one's own state , was epitomized by Washington . His first inaugural address speaks of `` my country whose voice I can never hear but with veneration and love '' . All sought the fruition of that nationalism in a Federal Government with substantial powers . Save Jefferson , all participated in the framing or ratification of the Federal Constitution . They supported it , not as a perfect instrument , but as the best obtainable . Historians have traditionally regarded the great debates of the Seventeen Nineties as polarizing the issues of centralized vs. limited government , with Hamilton and the nationalists supporting the former and Jefferson and Madison upholding the latter position . The state's rights position was formulated by Jefferson and Madison in the Kentucky and Virginia Resolves , but in their later careers as heads of state the two proved themselves better Hamiltonians than Jeffersonians . In purchasing Louisiana , Jefferson had to adopt Hamilton's broad construction of the Constitution , and so did Madison in advocating the rechartering of Hamilton's bank , which he had so strenuously opposed at its inception , and in adopting a Hamiltonian protective tariff . Indeed , the old Jeffersonians were far more atune to the Hamilton-oriented Whigs than they were to the Jacksonian Democrats . When , in 1832 , the South Carolina nullifiers adopted the principle of state interposition which Madison had advanced in his old Virginia Resolve , they elicited no encouragement from that senior statesman . In his political testament , `` Advice To My Country '' , penned just before his death , Madison expressed the wish `` that the Union of the States be cherished and perpetuated . Let the open enemy to it be regarded as a Pandora with her box opened ; ; and the disguised one , as the serpent creeping with his deadly wiles into Paradise '' . Tobacco Road is dead . Long live Tobacco Road . Nostalgic Yankee readers of Erskine Caldwell are today informed by proud Georgians that Tobacco Road is buried beneath a four-lane super highway , over which travel each day suburbanite businessmen more concerned with the Dow-Jones average than with the cotton crop . Thus we are compelled to face the urbanization of the South -- an urbanization which , despite its dramatic and overwhelming effects upon the Southern culture , has been utterly ignored by the bulk of Southern writers . Indeed , it seems that only in today's Southern fiction does Tobacco Road , with all the traditional trimmings of sowbelly and cornbread and mint juleps , continue to live -- but only as a weary , overexploited phantom . Those writers known collectively as the `` Southern school '' have received accolades from even those critics least prone to eulogize ; ; according to many critics , in fact , the South has led the North in literature since the Civil War , both quantitatively and qualitatively . Such writers as William Faulkner and Robert Penn Warren have led the field of somewhat less important writers in a sort of post-bellum renaissance . It is interesting , however , that despite this strong upsurge in Southern writing , almost none of the writers has forsaken the firmly entrenched concept of the white-suited big-daddy colonel sipping a mint julep as he silently recounts the revenue from the season's cotton and tobacco crops ; ; of the stereotyped Negro servants chanting hymns as they plow the fields ; ; of these and a host of other antiquated legends that deny the South its progressive leaps of the past century . This is not to say that the South is no longer agrarian ; ; such a statement would be the rankest form of oversimplification . But the South is , and has been for the past century , engaged in a wide-sweeping urbanization which , oddly enough , is not reflected in its literature . In 1900 the South was only 15% urban ; ; in 1950 it had become 47.1% urban . In a mere half-century the South has more than tripled its urban status . There is a New South emerging , a South losing the folksy traditions of an agrarian society with the rapidity of an avalanche -- especially within recent decades . As the New South snowballs toward further urbanization , it becomes more and more homogeneous with the North -- a tendency which Willard Thorp terms `` Yankeefication '' , as evidenced in such cities as Charlotte , Birmingham , and Houston . It is said that , even at the present stage of Southern urbanization , such a city as Atlanta is not distinctly unlike Columbus or Trenton . Undoubtedly even the old Southern stalwart Richmond has felt the new wind : William Styron mentions in his latest novel an avenue named for Bankhead McGruder , a Civil War general , now renamed , in typical California fashion , `` Buena Vista Terrace '' . The effects of television and other mass media are erasing regional dialects and localisms with a startling force . As for progress , the `` backward South '' can boast of Baton Rouge , which increased its population between 1940 and 1950 by two hundred and sixty-two percent , to 126,000 , the second largest growth of the period for all cities over 25,000 . The field , then , is ripe for new Southerners to step to the fore and write of this twentieth-century phenomenon , the Southern Yankeefication : the new urban economy , the city-dweller , the pains of transition , the labor problems ; ; the list is , obviously , endless . But these sources have not been tapped . Truman Capote is still reveling in Southern Gothicism , exaggerating the old Southern legends into something beautiful and grotesque , but as unreal as -- or even more unreal than -- yesterday . William Styron , while facing the changing economy with a certain uneasy reluctance , insists he is not to be classified as a Southern writer and yet includes traditional Southern concepts in everything he publishes . Even the great god Faulkner , the South's one probable contender for literary immortality , has little concerned himself with these matters ; ; such are simply not within his bounded province . Where are the writers to treat these changes ? ? Has the agrarian tradition become such an addiction that the switch to urbanism is somehow dreaded or unwanted ? ? Perhaps present writers hypnotically cling to the older order because they consider it useful and reliable through repeated testings over the decades . Lacking the pioneer spirit necessary to write of a new economy , these writers seem to be contenting themselves with an old one that is now as defunct as Confederate money . An example of the changes which have crept over the Southern region may be seen in the Southern Negro's quest for a position in the white-dominated society , a problem that has been reflected in regional fiction especially since 1865 . Today the Negro must discover his role in an industrialized South , which indicates that the racial aspect of the Southern dilemma hasn't changed radically , but rather has gradually come to be reflected in this new context , this new coat of paint . The Negro faces as much , if not more , difficulty in fitting himself into an urban economy as he did in an agrarian one . This represents a gradual change in an ever-present social problem . But there have been abrupt changes as well : the sit-ins , the picket lines , the bus strikes -- all of these were unheard-of even ten years ago . Today's evidence , such as the fact that only three Southern states ( South Carolina , Alabama and Mississippi ) still openly defy integration , would have astounded many of yesterday's Southerners into speechlessness . Other examples of gradual changes that have affected the Negro have been his moving up , row by row , in the buses ; ; his requesting , and often getting , higher wages , better working conditions , better schools -- changes that were slowly emerging even before the Supreme Court decision of 1954 . Then came this decision , which sped the process of gaining equality ( or perhaps hindered it ; ; only historical evolution will determine which ) : an abrupt change . Since 1954 the Negro's desire for social justice has led to an ironically anarchical rebellion . He has frequently refused to move from white lunch counters , refused to obey local laws which he considers unjust , while in other cases he has appealed to federal laws . This bold self-assertion , after decades of humble subservience , is indeed a twentieth-century phenomenon , an abrupt change in the Southern way of existence . A new order is thrusting itself into being . A new South is emerging after the post-bellum years of hesitation , uncertainty , and lack of action from the Negro in defining his new role in the amorphously defined socio-political organizations of the white man . The modern Negro has not made a decisive debut into Southern fiction . It is clear that , while most writers enjoy picturing the Negro as a woolly-headed , humble old agrarian who mutters `` yassuhs '' and `` sho' nufs '' with blissful deference to his white employer ( or , in Old South terms , `` massuh '' ) , this stereotype is doomed to become in reality as obsolete as Caldwell's Lester . While there may still be many Faulknerian Lucas Beauchamps scattered through the rural South , such men appear to be a vanishing breed . Writers openly admit that the Negro is easier to write than the white man ; ; but they obviously mean by this , not a Negro personality , but a Negro type . Presenting an individualized Negro character , it would seem , is one of the most difficult assignments a Southern writer could tackle ; ; and the success of such an endeavor is , as suggested above , glaringly rare . Just as the Negro situation points up the gradual and abrupt changes affecting Southern life , it also points up the non-representation of urbanism in Southern literature . The book concerned with the Negro's role in an urban society is rare indeed ; ; recently only Keith Wheeler's novel , Peaceable Lane , has openly faced the problem . All but the most rabid of Confederate flag wavers admit that the Old Southern tradition is defunct in actuality and sigh that its passing was accompanied by the disappearance of many genteel and aristocratic traditions of the reputedly languid ante-bellum way of life . Many earlier writers , mourning the demise of the old order , tended to romanticize and exaggerate this `` gracious Old South '' imagery , creating such lasting impressions as Margaret Mitchell's `` Tara '' Plantation . Modern writers , who are supposed to keep their fingers firmly upon the pulse of their subjects , insist upon drawing out this legend , prolonging its burial , when it well deserves a rest after the overexploitation of the past century . Perhaps these writers have been too deeply moved by this romanticizing ; ; but they can hardly deny that , exaggerated or not , the old panorama is dead . As John T. Westbrook says in his article , `` Twilight Of Southern Regionalism '' ( Southwest Review , Winter 1957 ) : `` The miasmal mausoleum where an Old South , already too minutely autopsied in prose and poetry , should be left to rest in peace , forever dead and ( let us fervently hope ) forever done with '' . Westbrook further bemoans the Southern writers' creation of an unreal image of their homeland , which is too readily assimilated by both foreign readers and visiting Yankees : `` Our northerner is suspicious of all this crass evidence ( of urbanization ) presented to his senses . It bewilders and befuddles him . He is too deeply steeped in William Faulkner and Robert Penn Warren . The fumes of progress are in his nose and the bright steel of industry towers before his eyes , but his heart is away in Yoknapatawpha County with razorback hogs and night riders . On this trip to the South he wants , above all else , to sniff the effluvium of backwoods-and-sand-hill subhumanity and to see at least one barn burn at midnight '' . Obviously , such a Northern tourist's purpose is somewhat akin to a child's experience with Disneyland : he wants to see a world of make-believe . In the meantime , while the South has been undergoing this phenomenal modernization that is so disappointing to the curious Yankee , Southern writers have certainly done little to reflect and promote their region's progress . Willard Thorp , in his new book , American Writing In The Twentieth Century , observes , quite validly it seems : `` Certain subjects are conspicuously absent or have been only lightly touched . No Southern novelist has done for Atlanta or Birmingham what Herrick , Dreiser , and Farrell did for Chicago or Dos Passos did for New York . There are almost no fictional treatments of the industrialized south '' . Not a single Southern author , major or minor , has made the urban problems of an urban South his primary source material . Faulkner , for one , appears to be safe from the accusing fingers of all assailants in this regard . Faulkner culminates the Southern legend perhaps more masterfully than it has ever been , or could ever be , done . He has made it his , and his it remains , irrevocably . He treats it with a mythological , universal application . As his disciples boast , even though his emphasis is elsewhere , Faulkner does show his awareness of the changing order of the South quite keenly , as can be proven by a quick recalling of his Sartoris and Snopes families . Even two decades ago in Go Down , Moses Faulkner was looking to the more urban future with a glimmer of hope that through its youth and its new way of life the South might be reborn and the curse of slavery erased from its soil . Yet his concern even here is with a slowly changing socio-economic order in general , and he never deals with such specific aspects of this change as the urban and industrial impact . Faulkner traces , in his vast and overpowering saga of Yoknapatawpha County , the gradual changes which seep into the South , building layer upon layer of minute , subtle innovation which eventually tend largely to hide the Old Way . Thus Faulkner reminds us , and wisely , that the `` new '' South has gradually evolved out of the Old South , and consequently its agrarian roots persist . Yet he presents a realm of source material which may well serve other writers if not himself : the problems with which a New South must grapple in groping through a blind adolescence into the maturity of urbanization . With new mechanization the modern farmer must perform the work of six men : a machine stands between the agrarian and his soil . The thousands of city migrants who desert the farms yearly must readjust with even greater stress and tension : the sacred wilderness is gradually surrendering to suburbs and research parks and industrial areas . Another element to concern the choreographer is that of the visual devices of the theatre . Most avant-garde creators , true to their interest in the self-sufficiency of pure movement , have tended to dress their dancers in simple lines and solid colors ( often black ) and to give them a bare cyclorama for a setting . But Robert Rauschenberg , the neo-dadaist artist , has collaborated with several of them . He has designed a matching backdrop and costumes of points of color on white for Mr. Cunningham's Summerspace , so that dancers and background merge into a shimmering unity . For Mr. Taylor's Images And Reflections she made some diaphanous tents that alternately hide and reveal the performer , and a girl's cape lined with grass . Mr. Nikolais has made a distinctive contribution to the arts of costume and decor . In fact , he calls his productions dance-theatre works of motion , shape , light , and sound . To raise the dancer out of his personal , pedestrian self , Mr. Nikolais has experimented with relating him to a larger , environmental orbit . He began with masks to make the dancer identify himself with the creature he appeared to be . He went on to use objects -- hoops , poles , capes -- which he employed as extensions of the body of the dancer , who moved with them . The depersonalization continued as the dancer was further metamorphosed by the play of lights upon his figure . In each case , the object , the color , even the percussive sounds of the electronic score were designed to become part of the theatrical being of the performer . The dancer who never loosens her hold on a parasol , begins to feel that it is part of herself . Or , clad from head to toe in fabric stretched over a series of hoops , the performer may well lose his sense of self in being a `` finial '' . As the dancer is depersonalized , his accouterments are animized , and the combined elements give birth to a new being . From this being come new movement ideas that utilize dancer and property as a single unit . Thus , the avant-garde choreographers have extended the scope of materials available for dance composition . But , since they have rejected both narrative and emotional continuity , how are they to unify the impressive array of materials at their disposal ? ? Some look deliberately to devices used by creators in the other arts and apply corresponding methods to their own work . Others , less consciously but quite probably influenced by the trends of the times , experiment with approaches that parallel those of the contemporary poet , painter , and musician . An approach that has appealed to some choreographers is reminiscent of Charles Olson's statement of the process of projective verse : `` one perception must immediately and directly lead to a further perception '' . The creator trusts his intuition to lead him along a path that has internal validity because it mirrors the reality of his experience . He disdains external restrictions -- conventional syntax , traditional metre . The unit of form is determined subjectively : `` the Heart , by the way of the Breath , to the Line '' . The test of form is fidelity to the experience , a gauge also accepted by the abstract expressionist painters . An earlier but still influential school of painting , surrealism , had suggested the way of dealing with the dream experience , that event in which seemingly incongruous objects are linked together through the curious associations of the subconscious . The resulting picture might appear a maze of restless confusions and contradictions , but it is more true to life than a portrait of an artificially contrived order . The contemporary painter tends to depict not the concrete objects of his experience but their essences as revealed in abstractions of their lines , colors , masses , and energies . He is still concerned , however , with a personal event . He accepts the accidents of his brushwork because they provide evidence of the vitality of the experience of creation . The work must be true to both the physical and the spiritual character of the experience . Some painters have less interest in the experience of the moment , with its attendant urgencies and ambiguities , than in looking beyond the flux of particular impressions to a higher , more serene level of truth . Rather than putting their trust in ephemeral sensations they seek form in the stable relationships of pure design , which symbolize an order more real than the disorder of the perceptual world . The concept remains subjective . But in this approach it is the artist's ultimate insight , rather than his immediate impressions , that gives form to the work . Others look to more objective devices of order . The musician employing the serial technique of composition establishes a mathematical system of rotations that , once set in motion , determines the sequence of pitches and even of rhythms and intensities . The composer may reverse or invert the order of his original set of intervals ( or rhythms or dynamic changes ) . He may even alter the pattern by applying a scheme of random numbers . But he cannot order his elements by will , either rational or inspired . The system works as an impersonal mechanism . Musicians who use the chance method also exclude subjective control of formal development . Again , the composer must select his own materials . But a tossing of coins , with perhaps the added safeguard of reference to the oracles of the I Ching , the Chinese Book Of Changes , dictates the handling of the chosen materials . Avant-garde choreographers , seeking new forms of continuity for their new vocabulary of movements , have turned to similar approaches . Some let dances take their form from the experience of creation . According to Katherine Litz , `` the becoming , the process of realization , is the dance '' . The process stipulates that the choreographer sense the quality of the initial movement he has discovered and that he feel the rightness of the quality that is to follow it . The sequence may involve a sharp contrast : for example , a quiet meditative sway of the body succeeded by a violent leap ; ; or it may involve more subtle distinctions : the sway may be gradually minimized or enlarged , its rhythmic emphasis may be slightly modified , or it may be transferred to become a movement of only the arms or the head . Even the least alteration will change the quality . An exploration of these possible relationships constitutes the process of creation and thereby gives form to the dance . The approach to the depiction of the experience of creation may be analytic , as it is for Miss Litz , or spontaneous , as it is for Merle Marsicano . She , too , is concerned with `` the becoming , the process of realization '' , but she does not think in terms of subtle variations of spatial or temporal patterns . The design is determined emotionally : `` I must reach into myself for the spring that will send me catapulting recklessly into the chaos of event with which the dance confronts me '' . Looking back , Miss Marsicano feels that her ideas may have been influenced by those of Jackson Pollock . At one time she felt impelled to make dances that `` moved all over the stage '' , much as Pollock's paintings move violently over the full extent of the canvas . But her conscious need was to break away from constricting patterns of form , a need to let the experience shape itself . Midi Garth also believes in subjective continuity that begins with the feeling engendered by an initial movement . It may be a free front-back swing of the leg , leading to a sideways swing of the arm that develops into a turn and the sensation of taking off from the ground . This became a dance called Prelude To Flight . A pervading quality of free lyricism and a building from turns close to the ground towards jumps into the air gives the work its central focus . Alwin Nikolais objects to art as an outpouring of personal emotion . He seeks to make his dancers more `` godlike '' by relating them to the impersonal elements of shape , light , color , and sound . If his dancers are sometimes made to look as if they might be creatures from Mars , this is consistent with his intention of placing them in the orbit of another world , a world in which they are freed of their pedestrian identities . It is through the metamorphosed dancer that the germ of form is discovered . In his recognition of his impersonal self the dancer moves , and this self , in the `` first revealed stroke of its existence '' , states the theme from which all else must follow . The theme may be the formation of a shape from which other shapes evolve . It may be a reaction to a percussive sound , the following movements constituting further reactions . It may establish the relation of the figure of the dancer to light and color , in which case changes in the light or color will set off a kaleidescope of visual designs . Unconcerned with the practical function of his actions , the dancer is engrossed exclusively in their `` motional content '' . Movements unfold freely because they are uninhibited by emotional bias or purposive drive . But the metamorphosis must come first . Though he is also concerned with freeing dance from pedestrian modes of activity , Merce Cunningham has selected a very different method for achieving his aim . He rejects all subjectively motivated continuity , any line of action related to the concept of cause and effect . He bases his approach on the belief that anything can follow anything . An order can be chanced rather than chosen , and this approach produces an experience that is `` free and discovered rather than bound and remembered '' . Thus , there is freshness not only in the individual movements of the dance but in the shape of their continuity as well . Chance , he finds , enables him to create `` a world beyond imagination '' . He cites with pleasure the comment of a lady , who exclaimed after a concert : `` Why , it's extremely interesting . But I would never have thought of it myself '' . The sequence of movements in a Cunningham dance is unlike any sequence to be seen in life . At one side of the stage a dancer jumps excitedly ; ; nearby , another sits motionless , while still another is twirling an umbrella . A man and a girl happen to meet ; ; they look straight at the audience , not at each other . He lifts her , puts her down , and walks off , neither pleased nor disturbed , as if nothing had happened . If one dancer slaps another , the victim may do a pirouette , sit down , or offer his assailant a fork and spoon . Events occur without apparent reason . Their consequences are irrelevant -- or there are no consequences at all . The sequence is determined by chance , and Mr. Cunningham makes use of any one of several chance devices . He may toss coins ; ; he may take slips of paper from a grab bag . The answers derived by these means may determine not only the temporal organization of the dance but also its spatial design , special slips designating the location on the stage where the movement is to be performed . The other variables include the dancer who is to perform the movement and the length of time he is to take in its performance . The only factors that are personally set by the choreographer are the movements themselves , the number of the dancers , and the approximate total duration of the dance . The `` approximate '' is important , because even after the order of the work has been established by the chance method , the result is not inviolable . Each performance may be different . If a work is divided into several large segments , a last-minute drawing of random numbers may determine the order of the segments for any particular performance . And any sequence can not only change its positions in the work but can even be eliminated from it altogether . Mr. Cunningham tries not to cheat the chance method ; ; he adheres to its dictates as faithfully as he can . However , there is always the possibility that chance will make demands the dancers find impossible to execute . Then the choreographer must arbitrate . He must rearrange matters so that two performers do not bump into each other . He must construct transitions so that a dancer who is told to lie prone one second and to leap wildly the next will have some physical preparation for the leap . The North and the South were in greater agreement on sovereignty , through all their dispute about it , than were the Founding Fathers . The truth in their conflicting concepts was expounded by statesmen of the calibre of Webster and Calhoun , and defended in the end by leaders of the nobility of Lincoln and Lee . The people everywhere had grown meanwhile in devotion to basic democratic principles , in understanding of and belief in the federal balance , and in love of their Union . Repeated efforts -- beginning with the Missouri Compromise of 1821 -- were made by such master moderates as Clay and Douglas to resolve the difference peacefully by compromise , rather than clear thought and timely action . Even so , confusion in this period gained such strength ( from compromise and other factors ) that it led to the bloodiest war of the Nineteenth century . Nothing can show more than this the immensity of the danger to democratic peoples that lies in even relatively slight deviation from their true concept of sovereignty . The present issue in Atlantica -- whether to transform an alliance of sovereign nations into a federal union of sovereign citizens -- resembles the American one of 1787-89 rather than the one that was resolved by Civil War . And so I would only touch upon it now ( much as I have long wanted to write a book about it ) . I think it is essential , however , to pinpoint here the difference between the two concepts of sovereignty that went to war in 1861 -- if only to see better how imperative is our need today to clarify completely our far worse confusion on this subject . The difference came down to this : The Southern States insisted that the United States was , in last analysis , what its name implied -- a Union of States . To their leaders the Constitution was a compact made by the people of sovereign states , who therefore retained the right to secede from it . This right of the State , its upholders contended , was essential to maintain the federal balance and protect the liberty of the people from the danger of centralizing power in the Union government . The champions of the Union maintained that the Constitution had formed , fundamentally , the united people of America , that it was a compact among sovereign citizens rather than states , and that therefore the states had no right to secede , though the citizens could . Writing to Speed on August 24 , 1855 , Lincoln made the latter point clear . In homely terms whose timeliness is startling today , he thus declared his own right to secede . `` We began by declaring that all men are created equal . We now practically read it , all men are created equal except Negroes . When the Know-nothings get control , it will read , All men are created equal except Negroes and foreigners and Catholics . When it comes to this , I shall prefer emigrating to some country where they make no pretence of loving liberty -- to Russia , for instance , where despotism can be taken pure , without the base alloy of hypocrisy '' ( His emphasis ) . When the Southern States exercised their `` right to secede '' , they formed what they officially styled `` The Confederate States of America '' . Dictionaries , as we have seen , still cite this government , along with the Articles of Confederation of 1781 , as an example of a confederacy . The fact is that the Southern Confederacy differed from the earlier one almost as much as the Federal Constitution did . The Confederate Constitution copied much of the Federal Constitution verbatim , and most of the rest in substance . It operated on , by and for the people individually just as did the Federal Constitution . It made substantially the same division of power between the central and state governments , and among the executive , legislative and judicial branches . The difference between confederacy and federal union in 1861 Many believe -- and understandably -- that the great difference between the Constitution of the Southern Confederacy and the Federal Constitution was that the former recognized the right of each state to secede . But though each of its members had asserted this right against the Union , the final Constitution which the Confederacy signed on March 11 -- nearly a month before hostilities began -- included no explicit provision authorizing a state to secede . Its drafters discussed this vital point but left it out of their Constitution . Their President , Jefferson Davis , interpreted their Constitution to mean that it `` admits of no coerced association '' , but this remained so doubtful that `` there were frequent demands that the right to secede be put into the Constitution '' . The Constitution of the Southern `` Confederation '' differed from that of the Federal Union only in two important respects : It openly , defiantly , recognized slavery -- an institution which the Southerners of 1787 , even though they continued it , found so impossible to reconcile with freedom that they carefully avoided mentioning the word in the Federal Constitution . They recognized that slavery was a moral issue and not merely an economic interest , and that to recognize it explicitly in their Constitution would be in explosive contradiction to the concept of sovereignty they had set forth in the Declaration of 1776 that `` all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights , that among them are life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness . '' The other important difference between the two Constitutions was that the President of the Confederacy held office for six ( instead of four ) years , and was limited to one term . These are not , however , differences in federal structure . The only important differences from that standpoint , between the two Constitutions , lies in their Preambles . The one of 1861 made clear that in making their government the people were acting through their states , whereas the Preamble of 1787-89 expressed , as clearly as language can , the opposite concept , that they were acting directly as citizens . Here are the two Preambles : Federal Constitution , 1789 `` we the People of the United States , in order to form a more perfect Union , establish Justice , insure domestic Tranquility , provide for the common Defence , promote the general Welfare , and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity , do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America '' . Confederate Constitution , 1861 `` We the people of the Confederate States , each state acting in its sovereign and independent character , in order to form a permanent federal government , establish justice , insure domestic tranquility , and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity -- invoking the favor and the guidance of Almighty God -- do ordain and establish this Constitution for the Confederate States of America '' . One is tempted to say that , on the difference between the concepts of sovereignty in these two preambles , the worst war of the Nineteenth century was fought . But though the Southern States , when drafting a constitution to unite themselves , narrowed the difference to this fine point by omitting to assert the right to secede , the fact remained that by seceding from the Union they had already acted on the concept that it was composed primarily of sovereign states . If the Union conceded this to them , the same right must be conceded to each remaining state whenever it saw fit to secede : This would destroy the federal balance between it and the states , and in the end sacrifice to the sovereignty of the states all the liberty the citizens had gained by their Union . Lincoln saw that the act of secession made the issue for the Union a vital one : Whether it was a Union of sovereign citizens that should continue to live , or an association of sovereign states that must fall prey either to `` anarchy or despotism '' . Much as he abhorred slavery , Lincoln was always willing to concede to each `` slave state '' the right to decide independently whether to continue or end it . Though his election was interpreted by many Southerners as the forerunner of a dangerous shift in the federal balance in favor of the Union , Lincoln himself proposed no such change in the rights the Constitution gave the states . After the war began , he long refused to permit emancipation of the slaves by Union action even in the Border States that stayed with the Union . He issued his Emancipation Proclamation only when he felt that necessity left him no other way to save the Union . In his Message of December 2 , 1862 , he put his purpose and his policy in these words -- which I would call the Lincoln Law of Liberty-and-Union : `` In giving freedom to the slave , we assure freedom to the free '' . What Lincoln could not concede was that the states rather than the people were sovereign in the Union . He fought to the end to preserve it as a `` government of the people , by the people , for the people '' . The truth on each side won in the civil war The fact that the Americans who upheld the sovereignty of their states did this in order to keep many of their people more securely in slavery -- the antithesis of individual liberty -- made the conflict grimmer , and the greater . Out of this ordeal the citizen emerged , in the South as in the North , as America's true sovereign , in `` a new birth of freedom '' , as Lincoln promised . But before this came about , 214,938 Americans had given their lives in battle for the two concepts of the sovereign rights of men and of states . On their decisive battlefield Lincoln did not distinguish between them when he paid tribute to the `` brave men , living and dead , who fought here '' . He understood that both sides were at fault , and he reached the height of saying so explicitly in his Second Inaugural . To my knowledge , Lincoln remains the only Head of State and Commander-in-Chief who , while fighting a fearful war whose issue was in doubt , proved man enough to say this publicly -- to give his foe the benefit of the fact that in all human truth there is some error , and in all our error , some truth . So great a man could not but understand , too , that the thing that moves men to sacrifice their lives is not the error of their thought , which their opponents see and attack , but the truth which the latter do not see -- any more than they see the error which mars the truth they themselves defend . It is much less difficult now than in Lincoln's day to see that on both sides sovereign Americans had given their lives in the Civil War to maintain the balance between the powers they had delegated to the States and to their Union . They differed in the balance they believed essential to the sovereignty of the citizen -- but the supreme sacrifice each made served to maintain a still more fundamental truth : That individual life , liberty and happiness depend on a right balance between the two -- and on the limitation of sovereignty , in all its aspects , which this involves . The 140,414 Americans who gave `` the last full measure of devotion '' to prevent disunion , preserved individual freedom in the United States from the dangers of anarchy , inherent in confederations , which throughout history have proved fatal in the end to all associations composed primarily of sovereign states , and to the liberties of their people . But the fact that 70,524 other Americans gave the same measure of devotion to an opposing concept served Liberty-and-Union in other essential ways . Its appeal from ballots to bullets at Fort Sumter ended by costing the Southerners their right to have slaves -- a right that was even less compatible with the sovereignty of man . The very fact that they came so near to winning by the wrong method , war , led directly to their losing both the war and the wrong thing they fought for , since it forced Lincoln to free their slaves as a military measure . There was a divine justice in one wrong thus undoing another . There was also a lesson , one that has served ever since to keep Americans , in their conflicts with one another , from turning from the ballot to the bullet . Yet though the Southern States lost the worst errors in their case , they did not lose the truth they fought for . The lives so many of them gave , to forestall what they believed would be a fatal encroachment by the Union on the powers reserved to their states have continued ever since to safeguard all Americans against freedom's other foe . As cells coalesced into organisms , they built new `` unnatural '' and internally controlled environments to cope even more successfully with the entropy-increasing properties of the external world . The useful suggestion of Professor David Hawkins which considers culture as a third stage in biological evolution fits quite beautifully then with our suggestion that science has provided us with a rather successful technique for building protective artificial environments . One wonders about its applicability to people . Will advances in human sciences help us build social structures and governments which will enable us to cope with people as effectively as the primitive combination of protein and nucleic acid built a structure of molecules which enabled it to adapt to a sea of molecular interaction ? ? The answer is , of course , yes . For the family is the simplest example of just such a unit , composed of people , which gives us both some immunity from , and a way of dealing with , other people . Social invention did not have to await social theory any more than use of the warmth of a fire had to await Lavoisier or the buoyant protection of a boat the formulations of Archimedes . But it has been during the last two centuries , during the scientific revolution , that our independence from the physical environment has made the most rapid strides . We have ample light when the sun sets ; ; the temperature of our homes is independent of the seasons ; ; we fly through the air , although gravity pulls us down ; ; the range of our voice ignores distance . At what stage are social sciences then ? ? Is the future of psychology akin to the rich future of physics at the time of Newton ? ? There is a haunting resemblance between the notion of cause in Copernicus and in Freud . And it is certainly no slight to either of them to compare both their achievements and their impact . Political theoretical understanding , although almost at a standstill during this century , did develop during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries , and resulted in a flood of inventions which increased the possibility for man to coexist with man . Consitutional government , popular vote , trial by jury , public education , labor unions , cooperatives , communes , socialized ownership , world courts , and the veto power in world councils are but a few examples . Most of these , with horrible exceptions , were conceived as is a ship , not as an attempt to quell the ocean of mankind , nor to deny its force , but as a means to survive and enjoy it . The most effective political inventions seem to make maximum use of natural harbors and are aware that restraining breakwaters can play only a minor part in the whole scheme . Just as present technology had to await the explanations of physics , so one might expect that social invention will follow growing sociological understanding . We are desperately in the need of such invention , for man is still very much at the mercy of man . In fact the accumulation of the hardware of destruction is day by day increasing our fear of each other . 3 , I want , therefore , to discuss a second and quite different fruit of science , the connection between scientific understanding and fear . There are certainly large areas of understanding in the human sciences which in themselves and even without political invention can help to dispel our present fears . Lucretius has remarked : `` The reason why all Mortals are so gripped by fear is that they see all sorts of things happening in the earth and sky with no discernable cause , and these they attribute to the will of God '' . Perhaps things were even worse then . It is difficult to reconstruct the primeval fears of man . We get some clue from a few remembrances of childhood and from the circumstance that we are probably not much more afraid of people now than man ever was . We are not now afraid of atomic bombs in the same way that people once feared comets . The bombs are as harmless as an automobile in a garage . We are worried about what people may do with them -- that some crazy fool may `` push the button '' . I am certainly not adequately trained to describe or enlarge on human fears , but there are certain features of the fears dispelled by scientific explanations that stand out quite clearly . They are in general those fears that once seemed to have been amenable to prayer or ritual . They include both individual fears and collective ones . They arise in situations in which one believes that what happens depends not only on the external world , but also on the precise pattern of behavior of the individual or group . Often it is recognized that all the details of the pattern may not be essential to the outcome but , because the pattern was empirically determined and not developed through theoretical understanding , one is never quite certain which behavior elements are effective , and the whole pattern becomes ritualized . Yet often fear persists because , even with the most rigid ritual , one is never quite free from the uneasy feeling that one might make some mistake or that in every previous execution one had been unaware of the really decisive act . To say that science had reduced many such fears merely reiterates the obvious and frequent statement that science eliminated much of magic and superstition . But a somewhat more detailed analysis of this process may be illuminating . The frequently postulated antique worry that the daylight hours might dwindle to complete darkness apparently gave rise to a ritual and celebration which we still recognize . It is curious that even centuries of repetition of the yearly cycle did not induce a sufficient degree of confidence to allow people to abandon the ceremonies of the winter solstice . This and other fears of the solar system have disappeared gradually , first , with the Ptolemaic system and its built-in concept of periodicity and then , more firmly , with the Newtonian innovation of an universal force that could account quantitatively for both terrestial and celestial motions . This understanding provides a very simple example of the fact that one can eliminate fear without instituting any controls . In fact , although we have dispelled the fear , we have not necessarily assured ourselves that there are no dangers . There is still the remote possibility of planetoid collision . A meteor could fall on San Francisco . Solar activities could presumably bring long periods of flood or drought . Our understanding of the solar system has taught us to replace our former elaborate rituals with the appropriate action which , in this case , amounts to doing nothing . Yet we no longer feel uneasy . This almost trivial example is nevertheless suggestive , for there are some elements in common between the antique fear that the days would get shorter and shorter and our present fear of war . We , in our country , think of war as an external threat which , if it occurs , will not be primarily of our own doing . And yet we obviously also believe that the avoidance of the disaster depends in some obscure or at least uncertain way on the details of how we behave . What elements of our behavior are decisive ? ? Our weapons production , our world prestige , our ideas of democracy , our actions of trust or stubbornness or secrecy or espionage ? ? We have staved off a war and , since our behavior has involved all these elements , we can only keep adding to our ritual without daring to abandon any part of it , since we have not the slightest notion which parts are effective . I think that we are here also talking of the kind of fear that a young boy has for a group of boys who are approaching at night along the streets of a large city . If an automobile were approaching him , he would know what was required of him , even though he might not be able to act quickly enough . With the group of boys it is different . He does not know whether to look up or look aside , to put his hands in his pockets or to clench them at his side , to cross the street , or to continue on the same side . When confronted with a drunk or an insane person I have no notion of what any one of them might do to me or to himself or to others . I believe that what I do has some effect on his actions and I have learned , in a way , to commune with drunks , but certainly my actions seem to resemble more nearly the performance of a rain dance than the carrying out of an experiment in physics . I am usually filled with an uneasiness that through some unwitting slip all hell may break loose . Our inability to explain why certain people are fond of us frequently induces the same kind of ritual and malaise . We are forced , in our behavior towards others , to adopt empirically successful patterns in toto because we have such a minimal understanding of their essential elements . Our collective policies , group and national , are similarly based on voodoo , but here we often lack even the empirically successful rituals and are still engaged in determing them . We use terms from our personal experience with individuals such as `` trust '' , `` cheat '' , and `` get tough '' . We talk about national character in the same way that Copernicus talked of the compulsions of celestial bodies to move in circles . We perform elaborate international exhortations and ceremonies with virtually no understanding of social cause and effect . Small wonder , then , that we fear . The achievements which dispelled our fears of the cosmos took place three centuries ago . What additional roles has the scientific understanding of the 19th and 20th centuries played ? ? In the physical sciences , these achievements concern electricity , chemistry , and atomic physics . In the life sciences , there has been an enormous increase in our understanding of disease , in the mechanisms of heredity , and in bio- and physiological chemistry . The major effect of these advances appears to lie in the part they have played in the industrial revolution and in the tools which scientific understanding has given us to build and manipulate a more protective environment . In addition , our way of dealing directly with natural phenomena has also changed . Even in domains where detailed and predictive understanding is still lacking , but where some explanations are possible , as with lightning and weather and earthquakes , the appropriate kind of human action has been more adequately indicated . Apparently the population as a whole eventually acquires enough confidence in the explanations of the scientists to modify its procedures and its fears . How and why this process occurs would provide an interesting separate subject for study . In some areas , the progress is slower than in others . In agriculture , for example , despite the advances in biology , elaborate rituals tend to persist along with a continued sense of the imminence of some natural disaster . In child care , the opposite extreme prevails ; ; procedures change rapidly and parental confidence probably exceeds anything warranted by established psychological theory . There are many domains in which understanding has brought about widespread and quite appropriate reduction in ritual and fear . Much of the former extreme uneasiness associated with visions and hallucinations and with death has disappeared . The persistent horror of having a malformed child has , I believe , been reduced , not because we have gained any control over this misfortune , but precisely because we have learned that we have so little control over it . In fact , the recent warnings about the use of X-rays have introduced fears and ambiguities of action which now require more detailed understanding , and thus in this instance , science has momentarily aggravated our fears . In fact , insofar as science generates any fear , it stems not so much from scientific prowess and gadgets but from the fact that new unanswered questions arise , which , until they are understood , create uncertainty . Perhaps the most illuminating example of the reduction of fear through understanding is derived from our increased knowledge of the nature of disease . The situation with regard to our attitude and `` control '' of disease contains close analogies to problems confronting us with respect to people . The fear of disease was formerly very much the kind of fear I have tried to describe . Nothing like Godot , he arrived before the hour . His letter had suggested we meet at my hotel at noon on Sunday , and I came into the lobby as the clock struck twelve . He was waiting . My wish to meet Samuel Beckett had been prompted by simple curiosity and interest in his work . American newspaper reviewers like to call his plays nihilistic . They find deep pessimism in them . Even so astute a commentator as Harold Clurman of The Nation has said that `` Waiting For Godot '' is `` the concentrate of the contemporary European mood of despair '' . But to me Beckett's writing had seemed permeated with love for human beings and with a kind of humor that I could reconcile neither with despair nor with nihilism . Could it be that my own eyes and ears had deceived me ? ? Is his a literature of defeat , irrelevant to the social crises we face ? ? Or is it relevant because it teaches us something useful to know about ourselves ? ? I knew that a conversation with the author would not settle such questions , because a man is not the same as his writing : in the last analysis , the questions had to be settled by the work itself . Nevertheless I was curious . My curiosity was sharpened a day or two before the interview by a conversation I had with a well-informed teacher of literature , a Jesuit father , at a conference on religious drama near Paris . When Beckett's name came into the discussion , the priest grew loud and told me that Beckett `` hates life '' . That , I thought , is at least one thing I can find out when we meet . Beckett's appearance is rough-hewn Irish . The features of his face are distinct , but not fine . They look as if they had been sculptured with an unsharpened chisel . Unruly hair goes straight up from his forehead , standing so high that the top falls gently over , as if to show that it really is hair and not bristle . One might say it combines the man ; ; own pride and humility . For he has the pride that comes of self-acceptance and the humility , perhaps of the same genesis , not to impose himself upon another . His light blue eyes , set deep within the face , are actively and continually looking . He seems , by some unconscious division of labor , to have given them that one function and no other , leaving communication to the rest of the face . The mouth frequently breaks into a disarming smile . The voice is light in timbre , with a rough edge that corresponds to his visage . The Irish accent is , as one would expect , combined with slight inflections from the French . His tweed suit was a baggy gray and green . He wore a brown knit sports shirt with no tie . We walked down the Rue De L'Arcade , thence along beside the Madeleine and across to a sidewalk cafe opposite that church . The conversation that ensued may have been engrossing but it could hardly be called world-shattering . For one thing , the world that Beckett sees is already shattered . His talk turns to what he calls `` the mess '' , or sometimes `` this buzzing confusion '' . I reconstruct his sentences from notes made immediately after our conversation . What appears here is shorter than what he actually said but very close to his own words . `` The confusion is not my invention . We cannot listen to a conversation for five minutes without being acutely aware of the confusion . It is all around us and our only chance now is to let it in . The only chance of renovation is to open our eyes and see the mess . It is not a mess you can make sense of '' . I suggested that one must let it in because it is the truth , but Beckett did not take to the word truth . `` What is more true than anything else ? ? To swim is true , and to sink is true . One is not more true than the other . One cannot speak anymore of being , one must speak only of the mess . When Heidegger and Sartre speak of a contrast between being and existence , they may be right , I don't know , but their language is too philosophical for me . I am not a philosopher . One can only speak of what is in front of him , and that now is simply the mess '' . Then he began to speak about the tension in art between the mess and form . Until recently , art has withstood the pressure of chaotic things . It has held them at bay . It realized that to admit them was to jeopardize form . `` How could the mess be admitted , because it appears to be the very opposite of form and therefore destructive of the very thing that art holds itself to be '' ? ? But now we can keep it out no longer , because we have come into a time when `` it invades our experience at every moment . It is there and it must be allowed in '' . I granted this might be so , but found the result to be even more attention to form than was the case previously . And why not ? ? How , I asked , could chaos be admitted to chaos ? ? Would not that be the end of thinking and the end of art ? ? If we look at recent art we find it preoccupied with form . Beckett's own work is an example . Plays more highly formalized than `` Waiting For Godot '' , `` Endgame '' , and `` Krapp's Last Tape '' would be hard to find . `` What I am saying does not mean that there will henceforth be no form in art . It only means that there will be new form , and that this form will be of such a type that it admits the chaos and does not try to say that the chaos is really something else . The form and the chaos remain separate . The latter is not reduced to the former . That is why the form itself becomes a preoccupation , because it exists as a problem separate from the material it accommodates . To find a form that accommodates the mess , that is the task of the artist now '' . Yet , I responded , could not similar things be said about the art of the past ? ? Is it not characteristic of the greatest art that it confronts us with something we cannot clarify , demanding that the viewer respond to it in his own never-predictable way ? ? What is the history of criticism but the history of men attempting to make sense of the manifold elements in art that will not allow themselves to be reduced to a single philosophy or a single aesthetic theory ? ? Isn't all art ambiguous ? ? `` Not this '' , he said , and gestured toward the Madeleine . The classical lines of the church which Napoleon thought of as a Temple of Glory , dominated all the scene where we sat . The Boulevard De La Madeleine , the Boulevard Malesherbes , and the Rue Royale ran to it with graceful flattery , bearing tidings of the Age of Reason . `` Not this . This is clear . This does not allow the mystery to invade us . With classical art , all is settled . But it is different at Chartres . There is the unexplainable , and there art raises questions that it does not attempt to answer '' . I asked about the battle between life and death in his plays . Didi and Gogo hover on the edge of suicide ; ; Hamm's world is death and Clov may or may not get out of it to join the living child outside . Is this life-death question a part of the chaos ? ? `` Yes . If life and death did not both present themselves to us , there would be no inscrutability . If there were only darkness , all would be clear . It is because there is not only darkness but also light that our situation becomes inexplicable . Take Augustine's doctrine of grace given and grace withheld : have you pondered the dramatic qualities in this theology ? ? Two thieves are crucified with Christ , one saved and the other damned . How can we make sense of this division ? ? In classical drama , such problems do not arise . The destiny of Racine's Phedre is sealed from the beginning : she will proceed into the dark . As she goes , she herself will be illuminated . At the beginning of the play she has partial illumination and at the end she has complete illumination , but there has been no question but that she moves toward the dark . That is the play . Within this notion clarity is possible , but for us who are neither Greek nor Jansenist there is not such clarity . The question would also be removed if we believed in the contrary -- total salvation . But where we have both dark and light we have also the inexplicable . The key word in my plays is ' perhaps ' '' . Given a theological lead , I asked what he thinks about those who find a religious significance to his plays . `` Well , really there is none at all . I have no religious feeling . Once I had a religious emotion . It was at my first Communion . No more . My mother was deeply religious . So was my brother . He knelt down at his bed as long as he could kneel . My father had none . The family was Protestant , but for me it was only irksome and I let it go . My brother and mother got no value from their religion when they died . At the moment of crisis it had no more depth than an old school tie . Irish Catholicism is not attractive , but it is deeper . When you pass a church on an Irish bus , all the hands flurry in the sign of the cross . One day the dogs of Ireland will do that too and perhaps also the pigs '' . But do the plays deal with the same facets of experience religion must also deal with ? ? `` Yes , for they deal with distress . Some people object to this in my writing . At a party an English intellectual -- so-called -- asked me why I write always about distress . As if it were perverse to do so ! ! He wanted to know if my father had beaten me or my mother had run away from home to give me an unhappy childhood . I told him no , that I had had a very happy childhood . Then he thought me more perverse than ever . I left the party as soon as possible and got into a taxi . On the glass partition between me and the driver were three signs : one asked for help for the blind , another help for orphans , and the third for relief for the war refugees . One does not have to look for distress . It is screaming at you even in the taxis of London '' . Lunch was over , and we walked back to the hotel with the light and dark of Paris screaming at us . The personal quality of Samuel Beckett is similar to qualities I had found in the plays . He says nothing that compresses experience within a closed pattern . `` Perhaps '' stands in place of commitment . At the same time , he is plainly sympathetic , clearly friendly . If there were only the mess , all would be clear ; ; but there is also compassion . As a Christian , I know I do not stand where Beckett stands , but I do see much of what he sees . As a writer on the theater , I have paid close attention to the plays . Harold Clurman is right to say that `` Waiting For Godot '' is a reflection ( he calls it a distorted reflection ) `` of the impasse and disarray of Europe's present politics , ethic , and common way of life '' . Yet it is not only Europe the play refers to . `` Waiting For Godot '' sells even better in America than in France . The consciousness it mirrors may have come earlier to Europe than to America , but it is the consciousness that most `` mature '' societies arrive at when their successes in technological and economic systematization propel them into a time of examining the not-strictly-practical ends of culture . America is now joining Europe in this `` mature '' phase of development . Whether any of us remain in it long will depend on what happens as a result of the technological and economic revolutions now going on in the countries of Asia and Africa , and also of course on how long the cold war remains cold . Even Hemingway , for all his efforts to formulate a naturalistic morality in The Sun Also Rises and A Farewell To Arms never maintained that sex was all . Hemingway's fiction is supported by a `` moral '' backbone and in its search for ultimate meaning hints at a religious dimension . And D. H. Lawrence , in Fantasia Of The Unconscious , protested vehemently against the overestimation of the sexual motive . Though sex in some form or other enters into all human activity and it was a good thing that Freud emphasized this aspect of human nature , it is fantastic to explain everything in terms of sex . `` All is not sex '' , declared Lawrence . Man is not confined to one outlet for his vital energy . The creative urge , for example , transcends the body and the self . But for the beat generation all is sex . Nothing is more revealing of the way of life and literary aspirations of this group than their attitude toward sex . For the beatnik , like the hipster , is in opposition to a society that is based on the repression of the sex instinct . He has elevated sex -- not Eros or libido but pure , spontaneous , uninhibited sex -- to the rank of the godhead ; ; it is Astarte , Ishtar , Venus , Yahwe , Dionysus , Christ , the mysterious and divine orgone energy flowing through the body of the universe . Jazz is sex , marijuana is a stimulus to sex , the beat tempo is adjusted to the orgiastic release of the sexual impulse . Lawrence Lipton , in The Holy Barbarians , stresses that for the beat generation sex is more than a source of pleasure ; ; it is a mystique , and their private language is rich in the multivalent ambiguities of sexual reference so that they dwell in a sexualized universe of discourse . The singular uncompromising force of their revolt against the cult of restraint is illustrated by their refusal to dance in a public place . The dance is but a disguised ritual for the expression of ungratified sexual desire . For this reason , too , their language is more forthright and earthy . The beatniks crave a sexual experience in which their whole being participates . It is therefore not surprising that they resist the lure of marriage and the trap of domesticity , for like cats they are determined not to tame their sexual energy . They withdraw to the underground of the slums where they can defy the precepts of legalized propriety . Unlike the heroes and flappers of the lost generation , they disdain the art of `` necking '' and `` petting '' . That is reserved for the squares . If they avoid the use of the pungent , outlawed four-letter word it is because it is taboo ; ; it is sacred . As Lipton , the prophet of the beat generation , declares : `` In the sexual act , the beat are filled with mana , the divine power . This is far from the vulgar , leering sexuality of the middle-class square in heat '' . This is the Holy Grail these knights of the orgasm pursue , this is the irresistible cosmic urge to which they respond . If Wilhelm Reich is the Moses who has led them out of the Egypt of sexual slavery , Dylan Thomas is the poet who offers them the Dionysian dialectic of justification for their indulgence in liquor , marijuana , sex , and jazz . In addition , they have been converted to Zen Buddhism , with its glorification of all that is `` natural '' and mysteriously alive , the sense that everything in the world is flowing . Thus , paradoxically , the beat writers resort to `` religious '' metaphors : they are in search of mana , the spiritual , the numinous , but not anything connected with formal religion . What they are after is the beatific vision . And Zen Buddhism , though it is extremely difficult to understand how these internal contradictions are reconciled , helps them in their struggle to achieve personal salvation through sexual release . The style of life chosen by the beat generation , the rhythm and ritual they have adopted as uniquely their own , is designed to enhance the value of the sexual experience . Jazz is good not only because it promotes wholeness but because of its decided sexual effect . Jazz is the musical language of sex , the vocabulary of the orgasm ; ; indeed , it is maintained that the sexual element in jazz , by freeing the listener of his inhibitions , can have therapeutic value . That is why , the argument runs , the squares are so fearful of jazz and yet perversely fascinated by it . Instead of giving themselves spontaneously to the orgiastic release that jazz can give them , they undergo psychoanalysis or flirt with mysticism or turn to prostitutes for satisfaction . Thus jazz is transmuted into something holy , the sacred road to integration of being . Jazz , like sex , is a mystique . It is not a substitute for sex but a dynamic expression of the creative impulse in unfettered man . The mystique of sex , combined with marijuana and jazz , is intended to provide a design for living . Those who are sexually liberated can become creatively alive and free , their instincts put at the service of the imagination . Righteous in their denunciation of all that makes for death , the beat prophets bid all men become cool cats ; ; let them learn to `` swing '' freely , to let go , to become authentically themselves , and then perhaps civilization will be saved . The beatnik , seceding from a society that is fatally afflicted with a deathward drive , is concerned with his personal salvation in the living present . If he is the child of nothingness , if he is the predestined victim of an age of atomic wars , then he will consult only his own organic needs and go beyond good and evil . He will not curb his instinctual desires but release the energy within him that makes him feel truly and fully alive , even if it is only for this brief moment before the apocalypse of annihilation explodes on earth . That is why the members of the beat generation proudly assume the title of the holy barbarians ; ; they will destroy the shrines , temples , museums , and churches of the state that is the implacable enemy of the life they believe in . Apart from the categorical imperative they derive from the metaphysics of the orgasm , the only affirmation they are capable of making is that art is their only refuge . Their writing , born of their experiments in marijuana and untrammeled sexuality , reflects the extremity of their existential alienation . The mind has betrayed them , reason is the foe of life ; ; they will trust only their physical sensations , the wisdom of the body , the holy promptings of the unconscious . With lyrical intensity they reveal what they hate , but their faith in love , inspired by the revolutionary rhythms of jazz , culminates in the climax of the orgasm . Their work mirrors the mentality of the psychopath , rootless and irresponsible . Their rebellion against authoritarian society is not far removed from the violence of revolt characteristic of the juvenile delinquent . And the life they lead is undisciplined and for the most part unproductive , even though they make a fetish of devoting themselves to some creative pursuit -- writing , painting , music . They are non-conformists on principle . When they express themselves it is incandescent hatred that shines forth , the rage of repudiation , the ecstasy of negation . It is sex that obsesses them , sex that is at the basis of their aesthetic creed . What they discuss with dialectical seriousness is the degree to which sex can inspire the Muse . Monogamy is the vice from which the abjectly fearful middle class continue to suffer , whereas the beatnik has the courage to break out of that prison of respectability . One girl describes her past , her succession of broken marriages , the abortions she has had and finally confesses that she loves sex and sees no reason why she must justify her passion . If it is an honest feeling , then why should she not yield to it ? ? `` Most often '' , she says , `` it's the monogamous relationship that is dishonest '' . There is nothing holy in wedlock . This girl soon drops the bourgeois pyschiatrist who disapproves of her life . She finds married life stifling and every prolonged sex relationship unbearably monotonous . This confession serves to make clear in part what is behind this sexual revolution : the craving for sensation for its own sake , the need for change , for new experiences . Boredom is death . In the realm of physical sensations , sex reigns supreme . Hence the beatniks sustain themselves on marijuana , jazz , free swinging poetry , exhausting themselves in orgies of sex ; ; some of them are driven over the borderline of sanity and lose contact with reality . One beat poet composes a poem , `` Lines On A Tijuana John '' , which contains a few happy hints for survival . The new fact the initiates of this cult have to learn is that they must move toward simplicity . The professed mission of this disaffiliated generation is to find a new way of life which they can express in poetry and fiction , but what they produce is unfortunately disordered , nourished solely on the hysteria of negation . Who are the creative representatives of this movement ? ? Nymphomaniacs , junkies , homosexuals , drug addicts , lesbians , alcoholics , the weak , the frustrated , the irresolute , the despairing , the derelicts and outcasts of society . They embrace independent poverty , usually with a `` shack-up '' partner who will help support them . They are full of contempt for the institution of matrimony . Their previous legalized marriages do not count , for they hold the laws of the state null and void . They feel they are leagued against a hostile , persecutory world , faced with the concerted malevolent opposition of squares and their hirelings , the police . This is the rhetoric of righteousness the beatniks use in defending their way of life , their search for wholeness , though their actual existence fails to reach these `` religious '' heights . One beatnik got the woman he was living with so involved in drugs and self-analysis and all-night sessions of sex that she was beginning to crack up . What obsessions had she picked up during these long nights of talk ? ? Sex as the creative principle of the universe , the secret of primitive religion , the life of myth . Everything in the final analysis reduced itself to sexual symbolism . In his chapter on `` The Loveways Of The Beat Generation '' , Lipton spares the reader none of the sordid details . No one asks questions about the free union of the sexes in West Venice so long as the partners share the negative attitudes of the group . The women who come to West Venice , having forsaken radicalism , are interested in living only for the moment , in being constantly on the move . Others who are attracted to this Mecca of the beat generation are homosexuals , heroin addicts , and smalltime hoodlums . Those who are sexual deviants are naturally drawn to join the beatniks . Since the homosexuals widely use marijuana , they do not have to be initiated . Part of the ritual of sex is the use of marijuana . As Lipton puts it : `` The Eros is felt in the magic circle of marijuana with far greater force , as a unifying principle in human relationships , than at any other time except , perhaps , in the mutual metaphysical orgasms . The magic circle is , in fact , a symbol of and preparation for the metaphysical orgasm '' . Under the influence of marijuana the beatnik comes alive within and experiences a wonderfully enhanced sense of self as if he had discovered the open sesame to the universe of being . Carried high on this `` charge '' , he composes `` magical '' poetry that captures the organic rhythms of life in words . If he thus achieves a lyrical , dreamlike , drugged intensity , he pays the price for his indulgence by producing work -- Allen Ginsberg's `` Howl '' is a striking example of this tendency -- that is disoriented , Dionysian but without depth and without Apollonian control . For drugs are in themselves no royal road to creativity . How is the beat poet to achieve unity of form when he is at the same time engaged in a systematic derangement of senses . If love reflects the nature of man , as Ortega Y Gasset believes , if the person in love betrays decisively what he is by his behavior in love , then the writers of the beat generation are creating a new literary genre . There were fences in the old days when we were children . Across the front of a yard and down the side , they were iron , either spiked along the top or arched in half circles . Alley fences were made of solid boards higher than one's head , but not so high as the golden glow in a corner or the hollyhocks that grew in a line against them . Side fences were hidden beneath lilacs and hundred-leaf roses ; ; front fences were covered with Virginia creeper or trumpet vines or honeysuckle . Square corner- and gate posts were an open-work pattern of cast-iron foliage ; ; they were topped by steeples complete in every detail : high-pitched roof , pinnacle , and narrow gable . On these posts the gates swung open with a squeak and shut with a metallic clang . The only extended view possible to anyone less tall than the fences was that obtained from an upper bough of the apple tree . The primary quality of that view seems , now , to have been its quietness , but that cannot at the time have impressed us . What one actually remembers is its greenness . From high in the tree , the whole block lay within range of the eye , but the ground was almost nowhere visible . One looked down on a sea of leaves , a breaking wave of flower . Every path from back door to barn was covered by a grape-arbor , and every yard had its fruit trees . In the center of any open space remaining our grandfathers had planted syringa and sweet-shrub , snowball , rose-of-Sharon and balm-of-Gilead . From above one could only occasionally catch a glimpse of life on the floor of this green sea : a neighbor's gingham skirt flashing into sight for an instant on the path beneath her grape-arbor , or the movement of hands above a clothesline and the flutter of garments hung there , half-way down the block . That was one epoch : the apple-tree epoch . Another had ended before it began . Time is a queer thing and memory a queerer ; ; the tricks that time plays with memory and memory with time are queerest of all . From maturity one looks back at the succession of years , counts them and makes them many , yet cannot feel length in the number , however large . In a stream that turns a mill-wheel there is a lot of water ; ; the mill-pond is quiet , its surface dark and shadowed , and there does not seem to be much water in it . Time in the sum is nothing . And yet -- a year to a child is an eternity , and in the memory that phase of one's being -- a certain mental landscape -- will seem to have endured without beginning and without end . The part of the mind that preserves dates and events may remonstrate , `` It could have been like that for only a little while '' ; ; but true memory does not count nor add : it holds fast to things that were and they are outside of time . Once , then -- for how many years or how few does not matter -- my world was bound round by fences , when I was too small to reach the apple tree bough , to twist my knee over it and pull myself up . That world was in scale with my own smallness . I have no picture in my mind of the garden as a whole -- that I could not see -- but certain aspects of certain corners linger in the memory : wind-blown , frost-bitten , white chrysanthemums beneath a window , with their brittle brown leaves and their sharp scent of November ; ; ripe pears lying in long grass , to be turned over by a dusty-slippered foot , cautiously , lest bees still worked in the ragged , brown-edged holes ; ; hot-colored verbenas in the corner between the dining-room wall and the side porch , where we passed on our way to the pump with the half-gourd tied to it as a cup by my grandmother for our childish pleasure in drinking from it . It was mother who planted the verbenas . I think that my grandmother was not an impassioned gardener : she was too indulgent a lover of dogs and grandchildren . My great-grandmother , I have been told , made her garden her great pride ; ; she cherished rare and delicate plants like oleanders in tubs and wall-flowers and lemon verbenas in pots that had to be wintered in the cellar ; ; she filled the waste spots of the yard with common things like the garden heliotrope in a corner by the woodshed , and the plantain lilies along the west side of the house . These my grandmother left in their places ( they are still there , more persistent and longer-lived than the generations of man ) and planted others like them , that flourished without careful tending . Three of these only were protected from us by stern commandment : the roses , whose petals might not be collected until they had fallen , to be made into perfume or rose-tea to drink ; ; the peonies , whose tight sticky buds would be blighted by the laying on of a finger , although they were not apparently harmed by the ants that crawled over them ; ; and the poppies . I have more than once sat cross-legged in the grass through a long summer morning and watched without touching while a poppy bud higher than my head slowly but visibly pushed off its cap , unfolded , and shook out like a banner in the sun its flaming vermilion petals . Other flowers we might gather as we pleased : myrtle and white violets from beneath the lilacs ; ; the lilacs themselves , that bloomed so prodigally but for the most part beyond our reach ; ; snowballs ; ; hollyhock blossoms that , turned upside down , make pink-petticoated ladies ; ; and the little , dark blue larkspur that scattered its seed everywhere . More potent a charm to bring back that time of life than this record of a few pictures and a few remembered facts would be a catalogue of the minutiae which are of the very stuff of the mind , intrinsic , because they were known in the beginning not by the eye alone but by the hand that held them . Flowers , stones , and small creatures , living and dead . Pale yellow snapdragons that by pinching could be made to bite ; ; seed-pods of the balsams that snapped like fire-crackers at a touch ; ; red-and-yellow columbines whose round-tipped spurs were picked off and eaten for the honey in them ; ; morning-glory buds which could be so grasped and squeezed that they burst like a blown-up paper bag ; ; bright flowers from the trumpet vine that made `` gloves '' on the ends of ten waggling fingers . Fuzzy caterpillars , snails with their sensitive horns , struggling grasshoppers held by their long hind legs and commanded to `` spit tobacco , spit '' . Dead fledgling birds , their squashed-looking nakedness and the odor of decay that clung to the hand when they had been buried in our graveyard in front of the purple flags . And the cast shell of a locust , straw-colored and transparent , weighing nothing , fragile but entire , with eyes like bubbles and a gaping slit down its back . Every morning early , in the summer , we searched the trunks of the trees as high as we could reach for the locust shells , carefully detached their hooked claws from the bark where they hung , and stabled them , a weird faery herd , in an angle between the high roots of the tulip tree , where no grass grew in the dense shade . We collected `` lucky stones '' -- all the creamy translucent pebbles , worn smooth and round , that we could find in the driveway . When these had been pocketed , we could still spend a morning cracking open other pebbles for our delight in seeing how much prettier they were inside than their dull exteriors indicated . We showed them to each other and said `` Would you have guessed '' ? ? Squatting on our haunches beside the flat stone we broke them on , we were safe behind the high closed gates at the end of the drive : safe from interruption and the observation and possible amusement of the passers-by . Thus shielded , we played many foolish games in comfortable unselfconsciousness ; ; even when the fences became a part of the game -- when a vine-embowered gate-post was the Sleeping Beauty's enchanted castle , or when Rapunzel let down her golden hair from beneath the crocketed spire , even then we paid little heed to those who went by on the path outside . We enjoyed a paradoxical freedom when we were still too young for school . In the heat of the summer , the garden solitudes were ours alone ; ; our elders stayed in the dark house or sat fanning on the front porch . They never troubled themselves about us while we were playing , because the fence formed such a definite boundary and `` Don't go outside the gate '' was a command so impossible of misinterpretation . We were not , however , entirely unacquainted with the varying aspects of the street . We were forbidden to swing on the gates , lest they sag on their hinges in a poor-white-trash way , but we could stand on them , when they were latched , rest our chins on the top , and stare and stare , committing to memory , quite unintentionally , all the details that lay before our eyes . The street that is full now of traffic and parked cars then and for many years drowsed on an August afternoon in the shade of the curbside trees , and silence was a weight , almost palpable , in the air . Every slight sound that rose against that pressure fell away again , crushed beneath it . A hay-wagon moved slowly along the gutter , the top of it swept by the low boughs of the maple trees , and loose straws were left hanging tangled among the leaves . A wheel squeaked on a hub , was still , and squeaked again . If a child watched its progress he whispered , `` Hay , hay , load of hay -- make a wish and turn away '' , and then stared rigidly in the opposite direction until the sound of the horses' feet returned no more . When the hay wagon had gone , and an interval passed , a huckster's cart might turn the corner . The horse walked , the reins were slack , the huckster rode with bowed shoulders , his forearms across his knees . Sleepily , as if half-reluctant to break the silence , he lifted his voice : `` Rhu-beb-ni-ice nice fresh rhu-beb today '' ! ! The lazy sing-song was spaced in time like the drone of a bumble-bee . No one seemed to hear him , no one heeded . The horse plodded on , and he repeated his call . It became so monotonous as to seem a part of the quietness . After his passage , the street was empty again . The sun moved slant-wise across the sky and down ; ; the trees' shadows circled from street to sidewalk , from sidewalk to lawn . At four-o'clock , or four-thirty , the coming of the newsboy marked the end of the day ; ; he tossed a paper toward every front door , and housewives came down to their steps to pick them up and read what their neighbors had been doing . The streets of any county town were like this on any sunshiny afternoon in summer ; ; they were like this fifty-odd years ago , and yesterday . But the fences were still in place fifty-odd years ago , and when we stood on the gate to look over , the sidewalk under our eyes was not cement but two rows of paving stones with grass between and on both sides . The curb was a line of stone laid edgewise in the dirt and tilted this way and that by frost in the ground or the roots of trees . Opposite every gate was a hitching post or a stone carriage-step , set with a rusty iron ring for tying a horse . The street was unpaved and rose steeply toward the center ; ; it was mud in wet weather and dust , ankle-deep , in dry , and could be crossed only at the corner where there were stepping stones . It had a bucolic atmosphere that it has lost long since . The hoofmarks of cattle and the prints of bare feet in the mud or in the dust were as numerous as the traces of shod horses . Cows were kept in backyard barns , boys were hired to drive them to and from the pasture on the edge of town , and familiar to the ear , morning and evening , were the boys' coaxing voices , the thud of hooves , and the thwack of a stick on cowhide . It is worth dwelling in some detail on the crisis of this story , because it brings together a number of characteristic elements and makes of them a curious , riddling compound obscurely but centrally significant for Mann's work . The wife , Amra , and her lover are both savagely portrayed , she as incarnate sensuality , `` voluptuous '' and `` indolent '' , possibly `` a mischief maker '' , with `` a kind of luxurious cunning '' to set against her apparent simplicity , her `` birdlike brain '' . Lautner , for his part , `` belonged to the present-day race of small artists , who do not demand the utmost of themselves '' , and the bitter description of the type includes such epithets as `` wretched little poseurs '' , the devastating indictment `` they do not know how to be wretched decently and in order '' , and the somewhat extreme prophecy , so far not fulfilled : `` They will be destroyed '' . The trick these two play upon Jacoby reveals their want not simply of decency but of imagination as well . His appearance as Lizzy evokes not amusement but horror in the audience ; ; it is a spectacle absolutely painful , an epiphany of the suffering flesh unredeemed by spirit , untouched by any spirit other than abasement and humiliation . At the same time the multiple transvestitism involved -- the fat man as girl and as baby , as coquette pretending to be a baby -- touches for a moment horrifyingly upon the secret sources of a life like Jacoby's , upon the sinister dreams which form the sources of any human life . The music which Lautner has composed for this episode is for the most part `` rather pretty and perfectly banal '' . But it is characteristic of him , we are told , `` his little artifice '' , to be able to introduce `` into a fairly vulgar and humorous piece of hackwork a sudden phrase of genuine creative art '' . And this occurs now , at the refrain of Jacoby's song -- at the point , in fact , of the name `` Lizzy '' -- ; ; a modulation described as `` almost a stroke of genius '' . `` A miracle , a revelation , it was like a curtain suddenly torn away to reveal something nude '' . It is this modulation which reveals to Jacoby his own frightful abjection and , simultaneously , his wife's infidelity . By the same means he perceives this fact as having communicated itself to the audience ; ; he collapses , and dies . In the work of every artist , I suppose , there may be found one or more moments which strike the student as absolutely decisive , ultimately emblematic of what it is all about ; ; not less strikingly so for being mysterious , as though some deeply hidden constatation of thoughts were enciphered in a single image , a single moment . So here . The horrifying humor , the specifically sexual embarrassment of the joke gone wrong , the monstrous image of the fat man dressed up as a whore dressing up as a baby ; ; the epiphany of that quivering flesh ; ; the bringing together around it of the secret liaison between indolent , mindless sensuality and sharp , shrewd talent , cleverness with an occasional touch of genius ( which , however , does not know `` how to attack the problem of suffering '' ) ; ; the miraculous way in which music , revelation and death are associated in a single instant -- all this seems a triumph of art , a rather desperate art , in itself ; ; beyond itself , also , it evokes numerous and distant resonances from the entire body of Mann's work . When I try to work out my reasons for feeling that this passage is of critical significance , I come up with the following ideas , which I shall express very briefly here and revert to in a later essay . Love is the crucial dilemma of experience for Mann's heroes . The dramatic construction of his stories characteristically turns on a situation in which someone is simultaneously compelled and forbidden to love . The release , the freedom , involved in loving another is either terribly difficult or else absolutely impossible ; ; and the motion toward it brings disaster . This prohibition on love has an especially poignant relation to art ; ; it is particularly the artist ( Tonio Kroger , Aschenbach , Leverkuhn ) who suffers from it . The specific analogy to the dilemma of love is the problem of the `` breakthrough '' in the realm of art . Again , the sufferings and disasters produced by any transgression against the commandment not to love are almost invariably associated in one way or another with childhood , with the figure of a child . Finally , the theatrical ( and perversely erotic ) notions of dressing up , cosmetics , disguise , and especially change of costume ( or singularity of costume , as with Cipolla ) , are characteristically associated with the catastrophes of Mann's stories . We shall return to these statements and deal with them more fully as the evidence for them accumulates . For the present it is enough to note that in the grotesque figure of Jacoby , at the moment of his collapse , all these elements come together in prophetic parody . Professionally a lawyer , that is to say associated with dignity , reserve , discipline , with much that is essentially middle-class , he is compelled by an impossible love to exhibit himself dressed up , disguised -- that is , paradoxically , revealed -- as a child , and , worse , as a whore masquerading as a child . That this abandonment takes place on a stage , during an ' artistic ' performance , is enough to associate Jacoby with art , and to bring down upon him the punishment for art ; ; that is , he is suspect , guilty , punishable , as is anyone in Mann's stories who produces illusion , and this is true even though the constant elements of the artist-nature , technique , magic , guilt and suffering , are divided in this story between Jacoby and Lautner . It appears that the dominant tendency of Mann's early tales , however pictorial or even picturesque the surface , is already toward the symbolic , the emblematic , the expressionistic . In a certain perfectly definite way , the method and the theme of his stories are one and the same . Something of this can be learned from `` The Way To The Churchyard '' ( 1901 ) , an anecdote about an old failure whose fit of anger at a passing cyclist causes him to die of a stroke or seizure . There is no more `` plot '' than that ; ; only slightly more , perhaps , than a newspaper account of such an incident would give . The artistic interest , then , lies in what the encounter may be made to represent , in the power of some central significance to draw the details into relevance and meaningfulness . The first sentence , with its platitudinous irony , announces an emblematic intent : `` The way to the churchyard ran along beside the highroad , ran beside it all the way to the end ; ; that is to say , to the churchyard '' . And the action is consistently presented with regard for this distinction . The highroad , one might say at first , belongs to life , while the way to the churchyard belongs to death . But that is too simple , and won't hold up . As the first sentence suggests , both roads belong to death in the end . But the highroad , according to the description of its traffic , belongs to life as it is lived in unawareness of death , while the way to the churchyard belongs to some other sort of life : a suffering form , an existence wholly comprised in the awareness of death . Thus , on the highroad , a troop of soldiers `` marched in their own dust and sang '' , while on the footpath one man walks alone . This man's isolation is not merely momentary , it is permanent . He is a widower , his three children are dead , he has no one left on earth ; ; also he is a drunk , and has lost his job on that account . His name is Praisegod Piepsam , and he is rather fully described as to his clothing and physiognomy in a way which relates him to a sinister type in the author's repertory -- he is a forerunner of those enigmatic strangers in `` Death In Venice '' , for example , who represent some combination of cadaver , exotic , and psychopomp . This strange person quarrels with a cyclist because the latter is using the path rather than the highroad . The cyclist , a sufficiently commonplace young fellow , is not named but identified simply as `` Life '' -- that and a license number , which Piepsam uses in addressing him . `` Life '' points out that `` everybody uses this path '' , and starts to ride on . Piepsam tries to stop him by force , receives a push in the chest from `` Life '' , and is left standing in impotent and growing rage , while a crowd begins to gather . His rage assumes a religious form ; ; that is , on the basis of his own sinfulness and abject wretchedness , Piepsam becomes a prophet who in his ecstasy and in the name of God imprecates doom on Life -- not only the cyclist now , but the audience , the world , as well : `` all you light-headed breed '' . This passion brings on a fit which proves fatal . Then an ambulance comes along , and they drive Praisegod Piepsam away . This is simple enough , but several more points of interest may be mentioned as relevant . The season , between spring and summer , belongs to life in its carefree aspect . Piepsam's fatal rage arises not only because he cannot stop the cyclist , but also because God will not stop him ; ; as Piepsam says to the crowd in his last moments : `` His justice is not of this world '' . Life is further characterized , in antithesis to Piepsam , as animal : the image of a dog , which appears at several places , is first given as the criterion of amiable , irrelevant interest aroused by life considered simply as a spectacle : a dog in a wagon is `` admirable '' , `` a pleasure to contemplate '' ; ; another wagon has no dog , and therefore is `` devoid of interest '' . Piepsam calls the cyclist `` cur '' and `` puppy '' among other things , and at the crisis of his fit a little fox-terrier stands before him and howls into his face . The ambulance is drawn by two `` charming '' little horses . Piepsam is not , certainly , religious in any conventional sense . His religiousness is intimately , or dialectically , connected with his sinfulness ; ; the two may in fact be identical . His unsuccessful strivings to give up drink are represented as religious strivings ; ; he keeps a bottle in a wardrobe at home , and `` before this wardrobe Praisegod Piepsam had before now gone literally on his knees , and in his wrestlings had bitten his tongue -- and still in the end capitulated '' . The cyclist , by contrast , blond and blue-eyed , is simply unreflective , unproblematic Life , `` blithe and carefree '' . `` He made no claims to belong to the great and mighty of this earth '' . Piepsam is grotesque , a disturbing parody ; ; his end is ridiculous and trivial . He is `` a man raving mad on the way to the churchyard '' . But he is more interesting than the others , the ones who come from the highroad to watch him , more interesting than Life considered as a cyclist . And if I have gone into so much detail about so small a work , that is because it is also so typical a work , representing the germinal form of a conflict which remains essential in Mann's writing : the crude sketch of Piepsam contains , in its critical , destructive and self-destructive tendencies , much that is enlarged and illuminated in the figures of , for instance , Naphta and Leverkuhn . In method as well as in theme this little anecdote with its details selected as much for expressiveness and allegory as for `` realism '' , anticipates a kind of musical composition , as well as a kind of fictional composition , in which , as Leverkuhn says , `` there shall be nothing unthematic '' . It resembles , too , pictures such as Durer and Bruegel did , in which all that looks at first to be solely pictorial proves on inspection to be also literary , the representation of a proverb , for example , or a deadly sin . `` Gladius Dei '' ( 1902 ) resembles `` The Way To The Churchyard '' in its representation of a conflict between light and dark , between `` Life '' and a spirit of criticism , negation , melancholy , but it goes considerably further in characterizing the elements of this conflict . The monk Savonarola , brought over from the Renaissance and placed against the background of Munich at the turn of the century , protests against the luxurious works displayed in the art-shop of M. Bluthenzweig ; ; in particular against a Madonna portrayed in a voluptuous style and modeled , according to gossip , upon the painter's mistress . Hieronymus , like Piepsam , makes his protest quite in vain , and his rejection , though not fatal , is ridiculous and humiliating ; ; he is simply thrown out of the shop by the porter . On the street outside , Hieronymus envisions a holocaust of the vanities of this world , such a burning of artistic and erotic productions as his namesake actually brought to pass in Florence , and prophetically he issues his curse : `` Gladius Dei super terram cito et velociter '' . The `` reality '' to which they respond is rationally empty and their art is an imitation of the inescapable powerfulness of this unknown and empty world . Their artistic rationale is given to the witness of unreason . These polar concerns ( imitation vs. formalism ) reflect a philosophical and religious situation which has been developing over a long period of time . The breakdown of classical structures of meaning in all realms of western culture has given rise to several generations of artists who have documented the disintegrative processes . Thus the image of man has suffered complete fragmentation in personal and spiritual qualities , and complete objectification in sub-human and quasi-mechanistic powers . The image of the world tends to reflect the hostility and indifference of man or else to dissolve into empty spaces and overwhelming mystery . The image of God has simply disappeared . All such imitations of negative quality have given rise to a compensatory response in the form of a heroic and highly individualistic humanism : if man can neither know nor love reality as it is , he can at least invent an artistic `` reality '' which is its own world and which can speak to man of purely personal and subjective qualities capable of being known and worthy of being loved . The person of the artist becomes a final bastion of meaning in a world rendered meaningless by the march of events and the decay of classical religious and philosophical systems . Whatever pole of this contrast one emphasizes and whatever the tension between these two approaches to understanding the artistic imagination , it will be readily seen that they are not mutually exclusive , that they belong together . Without the decay of a sense of objective reference ( except as the imitation of mystery ) , the stress on subjective invention would never have been stimulated into being . And although these insights into the nature of art may be in themselves insufficient for a thoroughgoing philosophy of art , their peculiar authenticity in this day and age requires that they be taken seriously and gives promise that from their very substance , new and valid chapters in the philosophy of art may be written . For better or worse we cannot regard `` imitation '' in the arts in the simple mode of classical rationalism or detached realism . A broader concept of imitation is needed , one which acknowledges that true invention is important , that the artist's creativity in part transcends the non-artistic causal factors out of which it arises . On the other hand , we cannot regard artistic invention as pure , uncaused , and unrelated to the times in which it occurs . We need a doctrine of imitation to save us from the solipsism and futility of pure formalism . Accordingly , it is the aim of this essay to advance a new theory of imitation ( which I shall call mimesis in order to distinguish it from earlier theories of imitation ) and a new theory of invention ( which I shall call symbol for reasons to be stated hereafter ) . The mimetic imagination in the arts The word `` mimesis '' ( `` imitation '' ) is usually associated with Plato and Aristotle . For Plato , `` imitation '' is twice removed from reality , being a poor copy of physical appearance , which in itself is a poor copy of ideal essence . All artistic and mythological representations , therefore , are `` imitations of imitations '' and are completely superseded by the truth value of `` dialectic '' , the proper use of the inquiring intellect . In Plato's judgment , the arts play a meaningful role in society only in the education of the young , prior to the full development of their intellectual powers . Presupposed in Plato's system is a doctrine of levels of insight , in which a certain kind of detached understanding is alone capable of penetrating to the most sublime wisdom . Aristotle also tended to stratify all aspects of human nature and activity into levels of excellence and , like Plato , he put the pure and unimpassioned intellect on the top level . The Poetics , in affirming that all human arts are `` modes of imitation '' , gives a more serious role to artistic mimesis than did Plato . But Aristotle kept the principle of levels and even augmented it by describing in the Poetics what kinds of character and action must be imitated if the play is to be a vehicle of serious and important human truths . For both Plato and Aristotle artistic mimesis , in contrast to the power of dialectic , is relatively incapable of expressing the character of fundamental reality . The central concern of Erich Auerbach's impressive volume called Mimesis is to describe the shift from a classic theory of imitation ( based upon a recognition of levels of truth ) to a Christian theory of imitation in which the levels are dissolved . Following the theme of Incarnation in the Gospels , the Christian artist and critic sees in the most commonplace and ordinary events `` figures '' of divine power and reality . Here artistic realism involves the audience in an impassioned participation in events whose overtones and implications are transcendent . Artistic mimesis under Christian influence records the involvement of all persons , however humble , in a divine drama . The artist , unlike the philosopher , is not a removed observer aiming at neutral and rarified high levels of abstraction . He is the conveyor of a sacred reality by which he has been grasped . I have chosen to use the word `` mimesis '' in its Christian rather than its classic implications and to discover in the concrete forms of both art and myth powers of theological expression which , as in the Christian mind , are the direct consequence of involvement in historical experience , which are not reserved , as in the Greek mind , only to moments of theoretical reflection . In the first instance , `` mimesis '' is here used to mean the recalling of experience in terms of vivid images rather than in terms of abstract ideas or conventional designations . By `` image '' is meant not only a visual presentation , but also remembered sensations of any of the five senses plus the feelings which are immediately conjoined therewith . This is the primary function of the imagination operating in the absence of the original experiential stimulus by which the images were first appropriated . Mimesis is the nearest possible thing to the actual re-living of experience , in which the imagining person recovers through images something of the force and depth characteristic of experience itself . The images themselves , like their counterparts in experience , are not neutral qualities to be surveyed dispassionately ; ; they are fields of force exerting a unique influence on the sensibilities and a unique relatedness to one another . They bring an inextricable component of value within themselves , with attractions and repulsions native to their own quality . As in experience one is seized by given entities and their interrelations and is forced to respond in value feelings to them , so one is similarly seized in the mimetic presentation of images . Mimesis here is not to be confused with literalism or realism in the conventional sense . A word taken in its dictionary meaning , a photographic image of a recognizable object , the mere picturing of a `` scene '' tends to lose experiential vividness and to connote such conventional abstractions as to invite neutral reception without the incitement of value feelings . Similarly experience itself can be conventionalized so that people react to certain preconceived clues for behavior without awareness of the vitality of their experiential field . A truly vivid imagination moves beyond the conventional recollection to a sense of immediacy . The mimetic character of the imaginative consciousness tends to express itself in the presentation of artistic forms and materials . When words can be used in a more fresh and primitive way so that they strike with the force of sights and sounds , when tones of sound and colors of paint and the carven shape all strike the sensibilities with an undeniable force of data in and of themselves , compelling the observer into an attitude of attention , all this imitates the way experience itself in its deepest character strikes upon the door of consciousness and clamors for entrance . These are like the initial ways in which the world forces itself upon the self and thrusts the self into decision and choice . The presence of genuine mimesis in art is marked by the persistence with which the work demands attention and compels valuation even though it is but vaguely understood . Underlying these conceptions of mimesis are certain presuppositions concerning the nature of primary human experience which require some exposition before the main argument can proceed . Experience is not seen , as it is in classical rationalism , as presenting us initially with clear and distinct objects simply located in space and registering their character , movements , and changes on the tabula rasa of an uninvolved intellect . Neither is primary experience understood according to the attitude of modern empiricism in which nothing is thought to be received other than signals of sensory qualities producing their responses in the appropriate sense organs . Primary feelings of the world come neither as a collection of clearly known objects ( houses , trees , implements , etc. ) nor a collection of isolated and neutral sensory qualities . In contrast to all this , primary data are data of a self involved in environing processes and powers . The most primitive feelings are rudimentary value feelings , both positive and negative : a desire to appropriate this or that part of the environment into oneself ; ; a desire to avoid and repel this or that other part . These desires presuppose a sense of causally efficacious powers in which one is involved , some working for one's good , others threatening ill . Gone is the tabula rasa of the mind . In its place is a passionate consciousness grasped and molded to feelings of positive or negative values even as the actions of one's life are determined by constellations of process in which one is caught . The principal defender of this view of primary experience as `` causal efficacy '' is Alfred North Whitehead . Our most elemental and unavoidable impressions , he says , are those of being involved in a large arena of powers which have a longer past than our own , which are interrelated in a vast movement through the present toward the future . We feel the quality of these powers initially as in some degree wholesome or threatening . Later abstractive and rational processes may indicate errors of judgment in these apprehensions of value , but the apprehensions themselves are the primary stuff of experience . It takes a great deal of abstraction to free oneself from the primitive impression of larger unities of power and influence and to view one's world simply as a collection of sense data arranged in such and such sequence and pattern , devoid of all power to move the feelings and actions except in so far as they present themselves for inspection . Whitehead is here questioning David Hume's understanding of the nature of experience ; ; he is questioning , also , every epistemology which stems from Hume's presupposition that experience is merely sense data in abstraction from causal efficacy , and that causal efficacy is something intellectually imputed to the world , not directly perceived . What Hume calls `` sensation '' is what Whitehead calls `` perception in the mode of presentational immediacy '' which is a sophisticated abstraction from perception in the mode of causal efficacy . As long as perception is seen as composed only of isolated sense data , most of the quality and interconnectedness of existence loses its objectivity , becomes an invention of consciousness , and the result is a philosophical scepticism . Whitehead contends that the human way of understanding existence as a unity of interlocking and interdependent processes which constitute each other and which cause each other to be and not to be is possible only because the basic form of such an understanding , for all its vagueness and tendency to mistake the detail , is initially given in the way man feels the world . In this respect experience is broader and full of a richer variety of potential meanings than the mind of man or any of his arts or culture are capable of making clear and distinct . A chief characteristic of experience in the mode of causal efficacy is one of derivation from the past . Both I and my feelings come up out of a chain of events that fan out into the past into sources that are ultimately very unlike the entity which I now am . After only eighteen years of non-interference , there were already indications of melioration , though `` in a slight degree '' , to be sure . There were more indications by the mid-twentieth century . I leave it to the statisticians to say what they were , but I noticed several a few years ago , during an automobile ride from Memphis to Hattiesburg . In town after town my companion pointed out the Negro school and the White school , and in every instance the former made a better appearance ( it was newer , for one thing ) . It really looked as if a change of the sort predicted by Booker T. Washington had been going on . But with the renewal of interference in 1954 ( as with its beginning in 1835 ) , the improvement was impaired . For over a hundred years Southerners have felt that the North was picking on them . It's infuriating , this feeling that one is being picked on , continually , constantly . By what right of superior virtue , Southerners ask , do the people of the North do this ? ? The traditional strategy of the South has been to expose the vices of the North , to demonstrate that the North possessed no superior virtue , to `` show the world that '' as James's Christopher Newman said to his adversaries ) `` however bad I may be , you're not quite the people to say it '' . In the pre-Civil War years , the South argued that the slave was not less humanely treated than the factory worker of the North . At the present time , the counter-attack takes the line that there's no more of the true spirit of `` integration '' in the North than in the South . The line is a pretty good one . People talk about `` the law of the land '' . The expression has become quite a cliche . But people can't be made to integrate , socialize ( the two are inseparable by Southern standards ) by law . I was having lunch not long ago ( apologies to N. V. Peale ) with three distinguished historians ( one specializing in the European Middle Ages , one in American history , and one in the Far East ) , and I asked them if they could name instances where the general mores had been radically changed with `` deliberate speed , majestic instancy '' ( Francis Thompson's words for the Hound Of Heaven's Pursuit ) by judicial fiat . They didn't seem to be able to think of any . A Virginia judge a while back cited a Roman jurist to the effect that ten years might be a reasonable length of time for such a change . But I suspect that the old Roman was referring to change made under military occupation -- the sort of change which Tacitus was talking about when he said , `` They make a desert , and call it peace '' ( `` Solitudinem faciunt , pacem appellant '' . ) . Moreover , the law of the land is not irrevocable ; ; it can be changed ; ; it has been , many times . Mr. Justice Taney's Dred Scott decision in 1857 was unpopular in the North , and soon became a dead letter . Prohibition was the law of the land , but it was unpopular ( how many of us oldsters took up drinking in prohibition days , drinking was so gay , so fashionable , especially in the sophisticated Northeast ! ! ) and was repealed . The cliche loses its talismanic virtue in the light of a little history . The Declaration of Independence says that `` governments derive their just powers from the consent of the governed '' . The phrase `` consent of the governed '' needs a hard look . How do we define it '' ? ? Is the consent of the governed a numerical majority ? ? Calhoun dealt with this question in his `` Disquisition On Government '' . To guard against the tyranny of a numerical majority , Calhoun developed his theory of `` concurrent majority '' , which , he said , `` by giving to each portion of the community which may be unequally affected by the action of government , a negative on the others , prevents all partial or local legislation '' . Who will say that our country is even now a homogeneous community ? ? That regional peculiarities do not still exist ? ? That the Court order does not unequally affect the Southern region ? ? Who will deny that in a vast portion of the South the Federal action is incompatible with the Jeffersonian concept of `` the consent of the governed '' ? ? Circumstances alter cases . A friend of mine in New Mexico said the Court order had caused no particular trouble out there , that all had gone as merry as a marriage bell . He seemed a little surprised that it should have caused any particular trouble anywhere . I murmured something about a possible difference between New Mexico's history and Mississippi's . One can meet with aloofness almost anywhere : the THIDIU viewpoint , It Doesn't Affect Us ! ! Southern Liberals ( there are a good many ) -- especially if they're rich -- often exhibit blithe insouciance . The trouble here is that it's almost too easy to take the high moral ground when it doesn't cost you anything . You've already sent your daughter to Miss X's select academy for girls and your son to Mr. Y's select academy for boys , and you can be as liberal as you please with strict impunity . If there's no suitable academy in your own neighborhood , there's always New England . New England academies welcome fugitives from the provinces , South as well as West . They may even enroll a colored student or two for show , though he usually turns out to be from Thailand , or any place other than the American South . It would be interesting to know how much `` integration '' there is in the famous , fashionable colleges and prep schools of New England . A recent newspaper report said there were five Negroes in the 1960 graduating class of nearly one thousand at Yale ; ; that is , about one-half of one per cent , which looks pretty `` tokenish '' to me , especially in an institution which professes to be `` national '' . I must confess that I prefer the Liberal who is personally affected , who is willing to send his own children to a mixed school as proof of his faith . I leave out of account the question of the best interests of the children , the question of what their best interests really are . I'm talking about the grand manner of the Liberal -- North and South -- who is not affected personally . If these people were denied a voice ( do they have a moral right to a voice ? ? ) , what voices would be left ? ? Who is involved willy nilly ? ? Well , after everybody has followed the New England pattern of segregating one's children into private schools , only the poor folks are left . And it is precisely in this poorer economic class that one finds , and has always found , the most racial friction . A dear , respected friend of mine , who like myself grew up in the South and has spent many years in New England , said to me not long ago : `` I can't forgive New England for rejecting all complicity '' . Being a teacher of American literature , I remembered Whittier's `` Massachusetts To Virginia '' , where he said : `` But that one dark loathsome burden ye must stagger with alone , And reap the bitter harvest which ye yourselves have sown '' . There is a legend ( Hawthorne records it in his `` English Notebooks '' . And one finds it again in Thomas Nelson Page ) to the effect that the Mayflower on its second voyage brought a cargo of Negro slaves . Whether historically a fact or not , the legend has a certain symbolic value . Complicity is an embarrassing word . It is something which most of us try to get out from under . Like the cowboy in Stephen Crane's `` Blue Hotel '' , we run around crying , `` Well , I didn't do anything , did I '' ? ? Robert Penn Warren puts it this way in `` Brother To Dragons '' : `` The recognition of complicity is the beginning of innocence '' , where innocence , I think , means about the same thing as redemption . A man must be able to say , `` Father , I have sinned '' , or there is no hope for him . Lincoln understood this better than most when he said in his `` Second Inaugural '' that God `` gives to both North and South this terrible war , as the woe due to those by whom the offense came '' . He also spoke of `` the wealth piled by the bondsman's two hundred and fifty years in unrequited toil '' . Lincoln was historian and economist enough to know that a substantial portion of this wealth had accumulated in the hands of the descendants of New Englanders engaged in the slave trade . After how many generations is such wealth ( mounting all the while through the manipulations of high finance ) purified of taint ? ? It is a question which New Englanders long ago put out of their minds . But didn't they get off too easy ? ? The slaves never shared in their profits , while they did share , in a very real sense , in the profits of the slave-owners : they were fed , clothed , doctored , and so forth ; ; they were the beneficiaries of responsible , paternalistic care . Emerson -- Platonist , idealist , doctrinaire -- sounded a high Transcendental note in his `` Boston Hymn '' , delivered in 1863 in the Boston Music Hall amidst thundering applause : `` Pay ransom to the owner and fill the bag to the brim . Who is the owner ? ? The slave is owner , And ever was . Pay him '' ! ! It is the abstractionism , the unrealism , of the pure idealist . It ignores the sordid financial aspects ( quite conveniently , too , for his audience , who could indulge in moral indignation without visible , or even conscious , discomfort , their money from the transaction having been put away long ago in a good antiseptic brokerage ) . Like Pilate , they had washed their hands . But can one , really ? ? Can God be mocked , ever , in the long run ? ? New Englanders were a bit sensitive on the subject of their complicity in Negro slavery at the time of the drafting of the Declaration of Independence , as Jefferson explained in his `` Autobiography '' : `` The clause reprobating the enslaving the inhabitants of Africa was struck out in complaisance to South Carolina and Georgia , who had never attempted to restrain the importation of slaves , and who on the contrary still wished to continue it . Our Northern brethren also I believe felt a little tender under those censures ; ; for though their people had very few slaves themselves , yet they had been pretty considerable carriers of them to others '' . But that was a long time ago . The New England conscience became desensitized . George W. Cable ( naturalized New Englander ) , writing in 1889 from `` Paradise Road , Northampton '' ( lovely symbolic name ) , agitated continuously the `` Southern question '' . It was nice to be able to isolate it . New England , as everyone knows , has long been schoolmaster to the Nation . There one finds concentrated in a comparatively small area the chief universities , colleges , and preparatory schools of the United States . Why should this be so ? ? It is true that New England , more than any other section , was dedicated to education from the start . But I think that something more than this is involved . How did it happen , for example , that the state university , that great symbol of American democracy , failed to flourish in New England as it did in other parts of the country ? ? Isn't it a bit odd that the three states of Southern New England ( Massachusetts , Connecticut , and Rhode Island ) have had state institutions of university status only in the very recent past , these institutions having previously been A & M colleges ? ? Was it supposed , perchance , that A & M ( vocational training , that is ) was quite sufficient for the immigrant class which flooded that part of the New England world in the post-Civil War period , the immigrants having been brought in from Southern Europe , to work in the mills , to make up for the labor shortage caused by migration to the West ? ? Is it not ironical that Roger Williams's state , Rhode Island , should have been the very last of the forty-eight to establish a state university ? ? The state universities of Maine , New Hampshire , And Vermont are older and more `` respectable '' ; ; they had less immigration to contend with . A Yale historian , writing a few years ago in The Yale Review , said : `` We in New England have long since segregated our children '' . He was referring not only to the general college situation but more especially to the preparatory schools . And what a galaxy of those adorns that fair land ! ! I don't propose to go into their history , but I have one or two surmises . One is that they were established , or gained eminence , under pressure provided by these same immigrants , from whom the old families wished to segregate their children . In the early days of a homogeneous population , the public school was quite satisfactory . Among the recipients of the Nobel Prize for Literature more than half are practically unknown to readers of English . Of these there are surely few that would be more rewarding discoveries than Verner Von Heidenstam , the Swedish poet and novelist who received the award in 1916 and whose centennial was celebrated two years ago . Equally a master of prose and verse , he recreates the glory of Sweden in the past and continues it into the present . In the following sketch we shall present a brief outline of his life and let him as much as possible speak for himself . Heidenstam was born in 1859 , of a prosperous family . On his father's side he was of German descent , on his mother's he came of the old Swedish nobility . The family estate was situated near Vadstena on Lake Vattern in south central Sweden . It is a lonely , rather desolate region , but full of legendary and historic associations . As a boy in a local school he was shy and solitary , absorbed in his fondness for nature and his visions of Sweden's ancient glory . He liked to fancy himself as a chieftain and to dress for the part . Being somewhat delicate in health , at the age of sixteen he was sent to Southern Europe , for which he at once developed a passion , so that he spent nearly all of the following ten years abroad , at first in Italy , then in Greece , Egypt , Asia Minor , and Palestine . In one of his summers at home he married , to the great disapproval of his father , who objected because of his extreme youth . Deciding to become a painter , he entered the studio of Gerome in Paris , where he enjoyed the life of the artists , but soon found that whatever talent he might have did not lie in that direction . He gives us an account of this in his lively and humorous poem , `` The Happy Artists '' . `` I scanned the world through printed symbol swart , And through the beggar's rags I strove to see The inner man . I looked unceasingly With my cold mind and with my burning heart '' . In this final line , we have the key to his nature . Few writers have better understood their deepest selves . Heidenstam could never be satisfied by surface . It may , however , be noted that his gift for color and imagery must have been greatly stimulated by his stay in Paris . The first result of Heidenstam's long sojourn abroad was a volume of poems , Pilgrimage And Wander-Years ( Vallfart och Vandringsar ) , published in 1888 . It was a brilliant debut , so much so indeed that it aroused a new vitality in the younger poets , as did Byron's Childe Harold . Professor Fredrik Book , Sweden's foremost critic of the period , acclaims it as follows : `` In this we have the verse of a painter ; ; strongly colorful , plastic , racy , vivid . In a bold , sometimes careless , form there is nothing academic ; ; all is seen and felt and experienced , the observation is sharp and the imagination lively . The young poet-painter reproduces the French life of the streets ; ; he tells stories of the Thousand and One Nights , and conjures up before us the bazaars of Damascus . In the care-free indolence of the East he sees the last reflection of the old happy existence , and for that reason he loves it . And yet amid all the gay hedonism in Pilgrimage And Wander-Years is a cycle of short poems , `` Thoughts In Loneliness '' , filled with brooding , melancholy , and sombre longing '' . Of the longer pieces of the volume none is so memorable as `` Nameless And Immortal '' , which at once took rank among the finest poems ever written in the Swedish language . It celebrates the unknown architect who designed the temple of Neptune at Paestum , next to the Parthenon the noblest example of Grecian classic style now in existence . On the eve of his return to their native Naxos he speaks with his wife of the masterpiece which rises before them in its completed perfection . The supreme object of their lives is now fulfilled , says the wife , her husband has achieved immortality . Not so , he answers , it is not the architect but the temple that is immortal . `` The man's true reputation is his work '' . The short poems grouped at the end of the volume as `` Thoughts in Loneliness '' is , as Professor Book indicated , in sharp contrast with the others . It consists of fragmentary personal revelations , such as `` The Spark '' : `` There is a spark dwells deep within my soul . To get it out into the daylight's glow Is my life's aim both first and last , the whole . It slips away , it burns and tortures me . That little spark is all the wealth I know , That little spark is my life's misery '' . A dominant motive is the poet's longing for his homeland and its boyhood associations : `` Not men-folk , but the fields where I would stray , The stones where as a child I used to play '' . He is utterly disappointed in himself and in the desultory life he has been leading . What he really wants is to find `` a sacred cause '' to which he can honestly devote himself . This restless individualism found its answer when he returned to live nearly all the rest of his life in Sweden . His cause was to commemorate the glory of her past and to incite her people to perpetuate it in the present . He did not , however , find himself at once . His next major work , completed in 1892 , was a long fantastic epic in prose , entitled Hans Alienus , which Professor Book describes as a monument on the grave of his carefree and indolent youth . The hero , who is himself , is represented as a pilgrim in the storied lands of the East , a sort of Faustus type , who , to quote from Professor Book again , `` even in the pleasure gardens of Sardanapalus can not cease from his painful search after the meaning of life . He is driven back by his yearning to the wintry homeland of his fathers in the forest of Tiveden '' . From this time on Heidenstam proceeded to find his deeper self . By the death of his father in 1888 he had come into possession of the family estate and had re-assumed its traditions . He did not , however , settle back into acquiescence with things as they were . Like his friend and contemporary August Strindberg he had little patience with collective mediocrity . He saw Sweden as a country of smug and narrow provincialism , indifferent to the heroic spirit of its former glory . Strindberg's remedy for this condition was to tear down the old structures and build anew from the ground up . Heidenstam's conception , on the contrary , was to revive the present by the memories of the past . Whether in prose or poetry , all of Heidenstam's later work was concerned with Sweden . With the first of a group of historical novels , The Charles Men ( Karolinerna ) , published in 1897-8 , he achieved the masterpiece of his career . In scope and power it can only be compared to Tolstoy's War And Peace . About one-third as long , it is less intimate and detailed , but better coordinated , more concise and more dramatic . Though it centers around the brilliant and enigmatic figure of Charles 12 , , the true hero is not finally the king himself . Hence the title of the book , referring to the soldiers and subjects of the king ; ; on the fatal battlefield of Poltava , to quote from the novel , `` the wreath he twined for himself slipped down upon his people '' . The Charles Men consists not of a connected narrative but of a group of short stories , each depicting a special phase of the general subject . Somewhat uneven in interest for an average reader , eight or ten of these are among the finest of their kind in literature . They comprise a great variety of scene and interest : grim episodes of war , idyllic interludes , superb canvases of world-shaking events , and delightfully humorous sketches of odd characters . The general effect is tragic . Almost nothing is said of Charles' spectacular victories , the central theme being the heroic loyalty of the Swedish people to their idolized king in misfortune and defeat . To carry out this exalted conception the author has combined the vivid realism and imaginative power we have noticed in his early poetry and carried them out on a grand scale . His peculiar gift , as had been suggested before , is his intensity . George Meredith has said that fervor is the core of style . Of few authors is this more true than of Heidenstam . The Charles Men has a tremendous range of characters , of common folk even more than of major figures . The career of Charles 12 , is obviously very similar to that of Napoleon . His ideal was Alexander of Macedon , as Napoleon's was Julius Caesar . His purpose , however , was not to establish an empire , but to assert the principle of divine justice . Each aspired to be a god in human form , but with each it was a different kind of god . Each failed catastrophically in an invasion of Russia and each brought ruin on the country that worshipped him . Each is still glorified as a national hero . The first half of The Charles Men , ending on the climax of the battle of Poltava in 1709 , is more dramatically coherent than the second . After the collapse of that desperate and ill-fated campaign the character of the king degenerated for a time into a futility that was not merely pitiable but often ridiculous . Like Napoleon , he was the worst of losers . There are , however , some wonderful chapters at the beginning of the second part , concerning the reactions of the Swedes in adversity . Then more than ever before did they show their fortitude and patient cheerfulness . This comes out in `` When The Bells Ring '' , which describes the rallying of the peasants in southern Sweden to repel an invasion by the Danes . In `` The King's Ride '' , Charles breaks out of a long period of petulance and inertia , regains his old self , escapes from Turkey , and finally reaches his own land after an absence of eighteen years . He finds it in utter misery and desolation . All his people ask for is no more war . But he plunges into yet another , this time with Norway , and is killed in an assault on the fortress of Fredrikshall , being only thirty-six years of age when he died . He had become king at fifteen . Then suddenly there was a tremendous revulsion of popular feeling . From being a hated tyrant and madman he was now the symbol of all that was noblest and best in the history of Sweden . This is brought out in the next to last chapter of the book , `` A Hero's Funeral '' , written in the form of an impassioned prose poem . Slowly the procession of warriors and statesmen passes through the snow beside the black water and into the brilliantly lighted cathedral , the shrine of so many precious memories . The guns are fired , the hymns are sung , and the body of Charles is carried down to the vault and laid beside the tombs of his ancestors . As he had longed to be , he became the echo of a saga . Heidenstam wrote four other works of fiction about earlier figures revered in Swedish memory . Excellent in their way , they lack the wide appeal of The Charles Men , and need not detain us here . It is different with his volume The Swedes And Their Chieftains ( Svenskarna och deras Hovdingar ) , a history intended for the general reader and particularly suited for high school students . Admirably written , it is a perfect introduction to Swedish history for readers of other countries . Some of the earlier episodes have touches of the supernatural , as suited to the legendary background . These are suggestive of Selma Lagerlof . Especially touching is the chapter , `` The Little Sister '' , about a king's daughter who became a nun in the convent of St. Birgitta . The record teems with romance and adventure . Gustaf Vasa is a superb example , and Charles 10 , , the conqueror of Denmark , hardly less so . Of Gustavus Adolphus and Charles 12 , it is unnecessary to speak . Today the private detective will also investigate insurance claims or handle divorce cases , but his primary function remains what it has always been , to assist those who have money in their unending struggle with those who have not . It is from this unpromising background that the fictional private detective was recruited . The mythological private eye differs from his counterpart in real life in two essential ways . On the one hand , he does not work for a large agency , but is almost always self-employed . As a free-lance investigator , the fictional detective is responsible to no one but himself and his client . For this reason , he appears as an independent and self-reliant figure , whose rugged individualism need not be pressed into the mold of a 9 to 5 routine . On the other hand , the fictional detective does not break strikes or handle divorce cases ; ; no client would ever think of asking him to do such things . Whatever his original assignment , the fictional private eye ends up by investigating and solving a crime , usually a murder . Operating as a one man police force in fact if not in name , he is at once more independent and more dedicated than the police themselves . He catches criminals not merely because he is paid to do so ( frequently he does not receive a fee at all ) , but because he enjoys his work , because he firmly believes that murder must be punished . Thus the fictional detective is much more than a simple businessman . He is , first and foremost , a defender of public morals , a servant of society . It is this curious blend of rugged individualism and public service which accounts for the great appeal of the mythological detective . By virtue of his self-reliance , his individualism and his freedom from external restraint , the private eye is a perfect embodiment of the middle class conception of liberty , which amounts to doing what you please and let the devil take the hindmost . At the same time , because the personal code of the detective coincides with the legal dictates of his society , because he likes to catch criminals , he is in middle class eyes a virtuous man . In this way , the private detective gets the best of two possible worlds . He is an individualist but not an anarchist ; ; he is a public servant but not a cop . In short , the fictional private eye is a specialized version of Adam Smith's ideal entrepreneur , the man whose private ambitions must always and everywhere promote the public welfare . In the mystery story , as in The Wealth of Nations , individualism and the social good are two sides of the same benevolent coin . There is only one catch to this idyllic arrangement : Adam Smith was wrong . Not only did the ideal entrepreneur not produce the greatest good for the greatest number , he ended by destroying himself , by giving birth to monopoly capitalism . The rise of the giant corporations in Western Europe and the United States dates from the period 1880-1900 . Now , although the roots of the mystery story in serious literature go back as far as Balzac , Dickens , and Poe , it was not until the closing decades of the 19th century that the private detective became an established figure in popular fiction . Sherlock Holmes , the ancestor of all private eyes , was born during the 1890s . Thus the transformation of Adam Smith's ideal entrepreneur into a mythological detective coincides closely with the decline of the real entrepreneur in economic life . Driven from the marketplace by the course of history , our hero disguises himself as a private detective . The birth of the myth compensates for the death of the ideal . Even on the fictional level , however , the contradictions which give rise to the mystery story are not fully resolved . The individualism and public service of the private detective both stem from his dedication to a personal code of conduct : he enforces the law without being told to do so . The private eye is therefore a moral man ; ; but his morality rests upon that of his society . The basic premise of all mystery stories is that the distinction between good and bad coincides with the distinction between legal and illegal . Unfortunately , this assumption does not always hold good . As capitalism in the 20th century has become increasingly dependent upon force and violence for its survival , the private detective is placed in a serious dilemma . If he is good , he may not be legal ; ; if he is legal , he may not be good . It is the gradual unfolding and deepening of this contradiction which creates the inner dialectic of the evolution of the mystery story . With the advent of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's Sherlock Holmes , the development of the modern private detective begins . Sherlock Holmes is not merely an individualist ; ; he is very close to being a mental case . A brief list of the great detective's little idiosyncrasies would provide Dr. Freud with ample food for thought . Holmes is addicted to the use of cocaine and other refreshing stimulants ; ; he is prone to semi-catatonic trances induced by the playing of the vioiln ; ; he is a recluse , an incredible egotist , a confirmed misogynist . Holmes rebels against the social conventions of his day not on moral but rather on aesthetic grounds . His eccentricity begins as a defense against boredom . It was in order to avoid the stuffy routine of middle class life that Holmes became a detective in the first place . As he informs Watson , `` My life is spent in one long effort to escape from the commonplaces of existence . These little problems help me to do so '' . Holmes is a public servant , to be sure ; ; but the society which he serves bores him to tears . The curious relationship between Holmes and Scotland Yard provides an important clue to the deeper significance of his eccentric behavior . Although he is perfectly willing to cooperate with Scotland Yard , Holmes has nothing but contempt for the intelligence and mentality of the police . They for their part are convinced that Holmes is too `` unorthodox '' and `` theoretical '' to make a good detective . Why do the police find Holmes `` unorthodox '' ? ? On the face of it , it is because he employs deductive techniques alien to official police routine . Another , more interesting explanation , is hinted at by Watson when he observes on several occasions that Holmes would have made a magnificent criminal . The great detective modestly agrees . Watson's insight is verified by the mysterious link between Holmes and his arch-opponent , Dr. Moriarty . The two men resemble each other closely in their cunning , their egotism , their relentlessness . The first series of Sherlock Holmes adventures ends with Holmes and Moriarty grappling together on the edge of a cliff . They are presumed to have plunged to a common grave in this fatal embrace . Linked to Holmes even in death , Moriarty represents the alter-ego of the great detective , the image of what our hero might have become were he not a public servant . Just as Holmes the eccentric stands behind Holmes the detective , so Holmes the potential criminal lurks behind both . In the modern English `` whodunnit '' , this insinuation of latent criminality in the detective himself has almost entirely disappeared . Hercule Poirot and Lord Peter Whimsey ( the respective creations of Agatha Christie and Dorothy Sayers ) have retained Holmes' egotism but not his zest for life and eccentric habits . Poirot and his counterparts are perfectly respectable people ; ; it is true that they are also extremely dull . Their dedication to the status quo has been affirmed at the expense of the fascinating but dangerous individualism of a Sherlock Holmes . The latter's real descendents were unable to take root in England ; ; they fled from the Victorian parlor and made their way across the stormy Atlantic . In the American `` hardboiled '' detective story of the '20s and '30s , the spirit of the mad genius from Baker Street lives on . Like Holmes , the American private eye rejects the social conventions of his time . But unlike Holmes , he feels his society to be not merely dull but also corrupt . Surrounded by crime and violence everywhere , the `` hardboiled '' private eye can retain his purity only through a life of self-imposed isolation . His alienation is far more acute than Holmes' ; ; he is not an eccentric but rather an outcast . With Rex Stout's Nero Wolfe , alienation is represented on a purely physical plane . Wolfe refuses to ever leave his own house , and spends most of his time drinking beer and playing with orchids . More profound and more disturbing , however , is the moral isolation of Raymond Chandler's Philip Marlowe . In a society where everything is for sale , Marlowe is the only man who cannot be bought . His tough honesty condemns him to a solitary and difficult existence . Beaten , bruised and exhausted , he pursues the elusive killer through the demi-monde of high society and low morals , always alone , always despised . In the end , he gets his man , but no one seems to care ; ; virtue is its own and only reward . A similar tone of underlying futility and despair pervades the spy thrillers of Eric Ambler and dominates the most famous of all American mystery stories , Dashiell Hammett's The Maltese Falcon . Sam Spade joins forces with a band of adventurers in search of a priceless jeweled statue of a falcon ; ; but when the bird is found at last , it turns out to be a fake . Now the detective must save his own skin by informing on the girl he loves , who is also the real murderer . For Sam Spade , neither crime nor virtue pays ; ; moreover , it is increasingly difficult to distinguish between the two . Because the private eye intends to save society in spite of himself , he invariably finds himself in trouble with the police . The latter are either too stupid to catch the killer or too corrupt to care . In either case , they do not appreciate the private detective's zeal . Perry Mason and Hamilton Burger , Nero Wolfe and Inspector Cramer spend more time fighting each other than they do in looking for the criminal . Frequently enough , the police are themselves in league with the killer ; ; Dashiell Hammett's Red Harvest provides a classic example of this theme . But even when the police are honest , they do not trust the private eye . He is , like Phillip Marlowe , too alienated to be reliable . Finally , in The Maltese Falcon among others , the clash between detective and police is carried to its logical conclusion : Sam Spade becomes the chief murder suspect . In order to exonerate himself , he is compelled to find the real criminal , who happens to be his girl friend . What was only a vague suspicion in the case of Sherlock Holmes now appears as a direct accusation : the private eye is in danger of turning into his opposite . It is the growing contradiction between individualism and public service in the mystery story which creates this fatal dilemma . By upholding his own personal code of behavior , the private detective has placed himself in opposition to a society whose fabric is permeated with crime and corruption . That society responds by condemning the private eye as a threat to the status quo , a potential criminal . If the detective insists upon retaining his personal standards , he must now do so in conscious defiance of his society . He must , in short , cease to be a detective and become a rebel . On the other hand , if he wishes to continue in his chosen profession , he must abandon his own code and sacrifice his precious individualism . Dashiell Hammett resolved this contradiction by ceasing to write mystery stories and turning to other pursuits . His successors have adopted the opposite alternative . In order to save the mystery story , they have converted the private detective into an organization man . The first of two possible variations on this theme is symbolized by Mickey Spillane's Mike Hammer . At first glance , this hero seems to be more rather than less of an individualist than any of his predecessors . For Hammer , nothing is forbidden . He kills when he pleases , takes his women where he finds them and always acts as judge , jury and executioner rolled into one . It will be shown that the objectives of the cooperative people in an organization determine the type of network required , because the type of network functions according to the characteristics of the messages enumerated in Table 1 . Great stress is placed on the role that the monitoring of information sending plays in maintaining the effectiveness of the network . By monitoring , we mean some system of control over the types of information sent from the various centers . As a word of caution , we should be aware that in actual practice no message is purely one of the four types , question , command , statement , or exclamation . For example , suppose a man wearing a $200 watch , driving a 1959 Rolls Royce , stops to ask a man on the sidewalk , `` What time is it '' ? ? This sentence would have most of the characteristics of a question , but it has some of the characteristics of a statement because the questioner has conveyed the fact that he has no faith in his own timepiece or the one attached to his car . If the man on the sidewalk is surprised at this question , it has served as an exclamation . Also , since the man questioned feels a strong compulsion to answer ( and thereby avoid the consequences of being thought queer ) the question has assumed some measurable properties of a command . However , for convenience we will stick to the idea that information can be classified according to Table 1 . On this basis , certain extreme kinds of networks will be discussed for illustrative purposes . Networks illustrating some special types of organization the cocktail party . Presumably a cocktail party is expected to fulfill the host's desire to get together a number of people who are inadequately acquainted and thereby arrange for bringing the level of acquaintance up to adequacy for future cooperative endeavors . The party is usually in a room small enough so that all guests are within sight and hearing of one another . The information is furnished by each of the guests , is sent by oral broadcasting over the air waves , and is received by the ears . Since the air is a continuum , the network of communication remains intact regardless of the positions or motions of the points ( the people ) in the net . As shown in Figure 1 , there is a connection for communication between every pair of points . This , and other qualifications , make the cocktail party the most complete and most chaotic communication system ever dreamed up . All four types of message listed in Table 1 are permitted , although decorum and cocktail tradition require holding the commands to a minimum , while exclamations having complimentary intonations are more than customarily encouraged . The completeness of the connections provide that , for N people , there are Af lines of communication between the pairs , which can become a large number ( 1,225 ) for a party of fifty guests . Looking at the diagram , we see that Af connection lines come in to each member . Thus the cocktail party would appear to be the ideal system , but there is one weakness . In spite of the dreams of the host for oneness in the group , the Af incoming messages for each guest overload his receiving system beyond comprehension if N exceeds about six . The crowd consequently breaks up into temporary groups ranging in size from two to six , with a half-life for the cluster ranging from three to twenty minutes . For the occasion on which everyone already knows everyone else and the host wishes them to meet one or a few honored newcomers , then the `` open house '' system is advantageous because the honored guests are fixed connective points and the drifting guests make and break connections at the door . The rural community . We consider a rural community as an assemblage of inhabited dwellings whose configuration is determined by the location and size of the arable land sites necessary for family subsistence . We assume for this illustration that the size of the land plots is so great that the distance between dwellings is greater than the voice can carry and that most of the communication is between nearest neighbors only , as shown in Figure 2 . Information beyond nearest neighbor is carried second- , third- , and fourth-hand as a distortable rumor . In Figure 2 , the points in the network are designated by a letter accompanied by a number . The numbers indicate the number of nearest neighbors . It will be noted that point f has seven nearest neighbors , h and e have six , and p has only one , while the remaining points have intermediate numbers . In any social system in which communications have an importance comparable with that of production and other human factors , a point like f in Figure 2 would ( other things being equal ) be the dwelling place for the community leader , while e and h would house the next most important citizens . A point like p gets information directly from n , but all information beyond n is indirectly relayed through n . The dweller at p is last to hear about a new cure , the slowest to announce to his neighbors his urgent distresses , the one who goes the farthest to trade , and the one with the greatest difficulty of all in putting over an idea or getting people to join him in a cooperative effort . Since the hazards of poor communication are so great , p can be justified as a habitable site only on the basis of unusual productivity such as is made available by a waterfall for milling purposes , a mine , or a sugar maple camp . Location theorists have given these matters much consideration . Military organizations . The networks for military communications are one of the best examples of networks which not only must be changed with the changes in objectives but also must be changed with the addition of new machines of war . They also furnish proof that , in modern war , message sending must be monitored . Without monitoring , a military hookup becomes a noisy party . The need for monitoring became greater when radio was adopted for military signaling . Alexander the Great , who used runners as message carriers , did not have to worry about having every officer in his command hear what he said and having hundreds of them comment at once . As time has passed and science has progressed , the speed of military vehicles has increased , the range of missiles has been extended , the use of target-hunting noses on the projectiles has been adopted , and the range and breadth of message sending has increased . Next to the old problem of the slowness of decision making , network structure seems to be paramount , and without monitoring no network has value . On the parade ground the net may be similar to that shown in Figure 3 . The monitoring is the highest and most restrictive of any organization in existence . No questions , statements , or explanations are permitted -- only commands . Commands go only from an officer to the man of nearest lower rank . The same command is repeated as many times as there are levels in rank from general to corporal . All orders originate with the officer of highest rank and terminate with action of the men in the ranks . Even the officer in charge , be it a captain ( for small display ) or a general , is restrained by monitoring . This is done for simplicity of commands and to bring the hidden redundancy up to where misunderstanding has almost zero possibility . The commands are specified by the military regulations ; ; are few in number , briefly worded , all different in sound ; ; and are combinable into sequences which permit any marching maneuver that could be desired on a parade ground . This monitoring is necessary because , on a parade ground , everyone can hear too much , and without monitoring a confused social event would develop . With troops dispersed on fields of battle rather than on the parade ground , it may seem that a certain amount of monitoring is automatically enforced by the lines of communication . Years ago this was true , but with the replacement of wires or runners by radio and radar ( and perhaps television ) , these restrictions have disappeared and now again too much is heard . In contrast to cocktail parties , military organizations , even in the field , are more formal . In the extreme and oversimplified example suggested in Figure 3 , the organization is more easily understood and more predictable in behavior . A military organization has an objective chosen by the higher command . This objective is adhered to throughout the duration of the action . The connective system , or network , is tailored to meet the requirements of the objective , and it is therefore not surprising that a military body acting as a single coordinated unit has a different communication network than a factory , a college , or a rural village . The assumptions upon which the example shown in Figure 3 is based are : ( A ) One man can direct about six subordinates if the subordinates are chosen carefully so that they do not need too much personal coaching , indoctrinating , etc. . ( B ) A message runs too great a risk of being distorted if it is to be relayed more than about six consecutive times . ( C ) Decisions of a general kind are made by the central command . And ( D ) all action of a physical kind pertinent to the mission is relegated to the line of men on the lower rank . These assumptions lead to an organization with one man at the top , six directly under him , six under each of these , and so on until there are six levels of personnel . The number of people acting as one body by this scheme gives a surprisingly large army of 55,987 men . This organizational network would be of no avail if there were no regulations pertaining to the types of message sent . Of types of message listed in Table 1 , commands and statements are the only ones sent through the vertical network shown in Figure 3 . A further regulation is that commands always go down , unaccompanied by statements , and statements always go up , unaccompanied by commands . Questions and , particularly , exclamations are usually channeled along informal , horizontal lines not indicated in Figure 3 and seldom are carried beyond the nearest neighbor . It will readily be seen that in this suggested network ( not materially different from some of the networks in vogue today ) greater emphasis on monitoring is implied than is usually put into practice . Furthermore , the network in Figure 3 is only the basic net through which other networks pertaining to logistics and the like are interlaced . Not discussed here are some military problems of modern times such as undersea warfare , where the surveillance , sending , transmitting , and receiving are all so inadequate that networks and decision making are not the bottlenecks . Such problems are of extreme interest as well as importance and are so much like fighting in a rain forest or guerrilla warfare at night in tall grass that we might have to re-examine primitive conflicts for what they could teach . A team for useful research . This is an unsolved problem which probably has never been seriously investigated , although one frequently hears the comment that we have insufficient specialists of the kind who can compete with the Germans or Swiss , for example , in precision machinery and mathematics , or the Finns in geochemistry . We hear equally fervent concern over the belief that we have not enough generalists who can see the over-all picture and combine our national skills and knowledge for useful purposes . This problem of the optimum balance in the relative numbers of generalists and specialists can be investigated on a communicative network basis . Since the difficulty of drawing the net is great , we will merely discuss it . First , we realize that a pure specialist does not exist . But , for practical purposes , we have people who can be considered as such . For example , there are persons who are in physical science , in the field of mineralogy , trained in crystallography , who use only X-rays , applying only the powder technique of X-ray diffraction , to clay minerals only , and who have spent the last fifteen years concentrating on the montmorillonites ; ; or persons in the social sciences in the field of anthropology , studying the lung capacity of seven Andean Indians . So we see that a specialist is a man who knows more and more about less and less as he develops , as contrasted to the generalist , who knows less and less about more and more . American democratic thought , pointed up the relation between the Protestant movement in this country and the development of a social religion , which he called the American Democratic Faith . Those familiar with his work will remember that he placed the incipience of the democratic faith at around 1850 . And he describes it as a balanced polarity between the notions of the free individual and what he called the fundamental law . I want to say more about Gabriel's so-called fundamental law . But first I want to quote him on the relationship that he found between religion and politics in this country and what happened to it . He points out that from the time of Jackson on through World War 1 , , evangelical Protestantism was a dominant influence in the social and political life of America . He terms this early enthusiasm `` Romantic Christianity '' and concludes that its similarity to democratic beliefs of that day is so great that `` the doctrine of liberty seems but a secular version of its counterpart in evangelical Protestantism '' . Let me quote him even more fully , for his analysis is important to my theme . He says : `` beside the Protestant philosophy of Progress , as expressed in radical or conservative millenarianism , should be placed the doctrine of the democratic faith which affirmed it to be the duty of the destiny of the United States to assist in the creation of a better world by keeping lighted the beacon of democracy '' . He specifies , `` in the middle period of the Nineteenth Century it was colored by Christian supernaturalism , in the Twentieth Century it was affected by naturalism . But in every period it has been humanism '' . And let me add , utopianism , also . Some fourteen or fifteen years ago , in an essay I called The Leader Follows -- Where ? ? I used his polarity to illustrate what I thought had happened to us in that form of liberalism we call Progressivism . It seemed to me that the liberals had scrapped the balanced polarity and reposed both liberty and the fundamental law in the common man . That is to say Gabriel's fundamental law had been so much modified by this time that it was neither fundamental nor law any more . It is a weakness of Gabriel's analysis that he never seems to realize that his so-called fundamental law had already been cut loose from its foundations when it was adapted to democracy . And with Progressivism the Religion of Humanity was replacing what Gabriel called Christian supernaturalism . And the common man was developing mythic power , or charisma , on his own . During the decade that followed , the common man , as that piece put it , grew uncomfortable as the Voice of God and fled from behind Saint Woodrow ( Wilson ) only to learn from Science , to his shocked relief that after all there was no God he had to speak for and that he was just an animal anyhow -- that there was a chemical formula for him , and that too much couldn't be expected of him . The socialism implicit in the slogan of the Roosevelt Revolution , freedom from want and fear , seems a far cry from the individualism of the First Amendment to the Constitution , or of the Jacksonian frontier . What had happened to the common man ? ? French Egalitarianism had had only nominal influence in this country before the days of Popularism . The riotous onrush of industrialism after the War for Southern Independence and the general secular drift to the Religion of Humanity , however , prepared the way for a reception of the French Revolution's socialistic offspring of one sort of another . The first of which to find important place in our federal government was the graduated income tax under Wilson . Moreover the centralization of our economy during the 1920s , the dislocations of the Depression , the common ethos of Materialism everywhere , all contributed in various ways to the face-lifting that replaced Mike Fink and the Great Gatsby with the anonymous physiognomy of the Little People . However , it is important to trace the philosophy of the French Revolution to its sources to understand the common democratic origin of individualism and socialism and the influence of the latter on the former . That John Locke's philosophy of the social contract fathered the American Revolution with its Declaration of Independence , I believe , we generally accept . Yet , after Rousseau had given the social contract a new twist with his notion of the General Will , the same philosophy , it may be said , became the idea source of the French Revolution also . The importance of Rousseau's twist has not always been clear to us , however . This notion of the General Will gave rise to the Commune of Paris in the Revolution and later brought Napoleon to dictatorship . And it is clearly argued by Lord Percy of Newcastle , in his remarkable long essay , The Heresy Of Democracy , and in a more general way by Voegelin , in his New Science Of Politics , that this same Rousseauan idea , descending through European democracy , is the source of Marx's theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat . This is important to understanding the position that doctrinaire liberals found themselves in after World War 2 , and our great democratic victory that brought no peace . The long road that had taken liberals in this country into the social religion of democracy , into a worship of man , led logically to the Marxist dream of a classless society under a Socialist State . And the ussr existed as the revolutionary experiment in radical socialism , the ultimate exemplar . And by the time the war ended , liberal leadership in this country was spiritually Marxist . We will recall that the still confident liberals of the Truman administration gathered with other Western utopians in San Francisco to set up the legal framework , finally and at last , to rationalize war -- to rationalize want and fear -- out of the world : the United Nations . We of the liberal-led world got all set for peace and rehabilitation . Then suddenly we found ourselves in the middle of another fight , an irrational , an indecent , an undeclared and immoral war with our strongest ( and some had thought noblest ) ally . During the next five years the leaders of the Fair Deal reluctantly backed down from the optimistic expectations of the New Deal . During the next five years liberal leaders in the United States sank in the cumulative confusion attendant upon and manifested in a negative policy of Containment -- and the bitterest irony -- enforced and enforceable only by threat of a weapon that we felt the greatest distaste for but could not abandon : the atom bomb . In 1952 , it will be remembered , the G.O.P. without positive program campaigned on the popular disillusionment with liberal leadership and won overwhelmingly . All of this , I know , is recent history familiar to you . But I have been at some pains to review it as the drama of the common man , to point up what happened to him under Eisenhower's leadership . A perceptive journalist , Sam Lubell , has phrased it in the title of one of his books as the revolt of the moderates . He opens his discourse , however , with a review of the Eisenhower inaugural festivities at which a sympathetic press had assembled its massive talents , all primed to catch some revelation of the emerging new age . The show was colorful , indeed , exuberant , but the press for all its assiduity could detect no note of a fateful rendezvous with destiny . Lubell offers his book as an explanation of why there was no clue . And I select this sentence as its pertinent summation : `` in essence the drama of his ( Eisenhower's ) Presidency can be described as the ordeal of a nation turned conservative and struggling -- thus far with but limited and precarious success -- to give effective voice and force to that conservatism '' . I will assume that we are all aware of the continuing struggle , with its limited and precarious success , toward conservatism . It has moved on various levels , it has been clamorous and confused . Obviously there has been no agreement on what American conservatism is , or rather , what it should be . For it was neglected , not to say nascent , when the struggle began . I saw a piece the other day assailing William Buckley , author of Man And God at Yale and publisher of The National Review , as no conservative at all , but an old liberal . I would agree with this view . But I'm not here to define conservatism . What I am here to do is to report on the gyrations of the struggle -- a struggle that amounts to self-redefinition -- to see if we can predict its future course . One of the obvious conclusions we can make on the basis of the last election , I suppose , is that we , the majority , were dissatisfied with Eisenhower conservatism . Though , to be sure , we gave Kennedy no very positive approval in the margin of his preferment . This is , however , symptomatic of our national malaise . But before I try to diagnose it , I would offer other evidence . I will mention two volumes of specific comment on this malaise that appeared last year . The earlier of them was an unofficial enterprise , sponsored by Life magazine , under the title of The National Purpose . The contributors to this testament were all well-known : a former Democratic candidate for President , a New Deal poet , the magazine's chief editorial writer , two newspaper columnists , head of a national broadcasting company , a popular Protestant evangelist , etc. . What I want to point out here is that all of them are ex-liberals , or modified liberals , with perhaps one exception . I suppose we might classify Billy Graham as an old liberal . And I would further note that they all -- with one exception again -- sang in one key or another the same song . Its refrain was : `` let us return to the individualistic democracy of our forefathers for our salvation '' . Adlai Stevenson expressed some reservations about this return . Others invoked technology and common sense . Only Walter Lippman envisioned the possibility of our having `` outlived most of what we used to regard as the program of our national purposes '' . But the most notable thing about the incantation of these ex-liberals was that the one-time shibboleth of socialism was conspicuously absent . The second specific comment was the report of Eisenhower's Commission on National Goals , titled Goals For Americans . They , perhaps , gave the pitch of their position in the preface where it was said that Eisenhower requested that the Commission be administered by the American Assembly of Columbia University , because it was non-partisan . The Commission seems to represent the viewpoint of what I would call the unconscious liberal , but not unconscious enough , to invoke the now taboo symbolism of socialism . And here again we hear the same refrain mentioned above : `` the paramount goal of the United States set long ago was to guard the rights of the individual , ensure his development , enlarge his opportunity '' . This group is secularist and their program tends to be technological . But it is the need to undertake these testaments that I would submit here as symptom of the common man's malaise . And let me add Murray's new book as another symptom of it , particularly so in view of the attention Time magazine gave it when it came out recently . Father Murray goes back to the Declaration of Independence , too , though I may add , with considerably more historical perception . I will reserve discussion of it for a moment , however , to return to President Kennedy . As symptomatic of the common man's malaise , he is most significant : a liberal and a Catholic , elected by the skin of his teeth . Does that not suggest to you an uncertain and uneasy , not to say confused , state of the public mind ? ? What is the common man's complaint ? ? Let's take a panoramic look back over the course we have come . Has not that way been lit always by the lamp of liberalism up until the turning back under Eisenhower ? ? And the basic character of that liberalism has been spiritual rather than economic . Ralph Gabriel gave it the name of Protestant philosophy of Progress . But there's a subjective side to that utopian outlook . Does our society have a runaway , uncontrollable growth of technology which may end our civilization , or a normal , healthy growth ? ? Here there may be an analogy with cancer : we can detect cancers by their rapidly accelerating growth , determinable only when related to the more normal rate of healthy growth . Should the accelerating growth of technology then warn us ? ? Noting such evidence is the first step ; ; and almost the only `` cure '' is early detection and removal . One way to determine whether we have so dangerous a technology would be to check the strength of our society's organs to see if their functioning is as healthy as before . So an objective look at our present procedures may move us to consider seriously this possibly analogous situation . In any event , whether society may have cancer , or merely a virus infection , the `` disease '' , we shall find , is political , economical , social , and even medical . Have not our physical abilities already deteriorated because of the more sedentary lives we are now living ? ? Hence the prime issue , as I see it , is whether a democratic or free society can master technology for the benefit of mankind , or whether technology will rule and develop its own society compatible with its own needs as a force of nature . We are already committed to establishing man's supremacy over nature and everywhere on earth , not merely in the limited social-political-economical context we are fond of today . Otherwise , we go on endlessly trying to draw the line , color and other , as to which kind of man we wish to see dominate . We have proved so able to solve technological problems that to contend we cannot realize a universal goal in the immediate future is to be extremely shortsighted , if nothing else . We must believe we have the ability to affect our own destinies : otherwise why try anything ? ? So in these pages the term `` technology '' is used to include any and all means which could amplify , project , or augment man's control over himself and over other men . Naturally this includes all communication forms , e.g. languages , or any social , political , economic or religious structures employed for such control . Properly mindful of all the cultures in existence today throughout the world , we must employ these resources without war or violent revolution . If we were creating a wholly new society , we could insist that our social , political , economic and philosophic institutions foster rather than hamper man ; ; best growth . But we cannot start off with a clean slate . So we must first analyze our present institutions with respect to the effect of each on man's major needs . Asked which institution most needs correction , I would say the corporation as it exists in America today . At first glance this appears strange : of all people , was not America founded by rugged individualists who established a new way of life still inspiring `` undeveloped '' societies abroad ? ? But hear Harrison E. Salisbury , former Moscow correspondent of The New York Times , and author of `` To Moscow -- And Beyond '' . In a book review of `` The Soviet Cultural Offensive '' , he says , `` Long before the State Department organized its bureaucracy into an East-West Contacts Staff in order to wage a cultural counter-offensive within Soviet borders , the sharp cutting-edge of American culture had carved its mark across the Russian steppes , as when the enterprising promoters of ' Porgy And Bess ' overrode the State Department to carry the contemporary ' cultural warfare ' behind the enemy lines . They were not diplomats or jazz musicians , or even organizers of reading-rooms and photo-montage displays , but rugged capitalist entrepreneurs like Henry Ford , Hugh Cooper , Thomas Campbell , the International Harvester Co. , and David W. Griffith . Their kind created an American culture superior to any in the world , an industrial and technological culture which penetrated Russia as it did almost every corner of the earth without a nickel from the Federal treasury or a single governmental specialist to contrive directives or program a series of consultations of interested agencies . This favorable image of America in the minds of Russian men and women is still there despite years of energetic anti-American propaganda '' corporations now outmoded . Perhaps the public's present attitude toward business stems from the fact that the `` rugged capitalist entrepreneur '' no more exists in America . In his stead is a milquetoast version known as `` the corporation '' . But even if we cannot see the repulsive characteristics in this new image of America , foreigners can ; ; and our loss of `` prestige '' abroad is the direct result . No amount of ballyhoo will cover up the sordid facts . If we want respect from ourselves or others , we will have to earn it . First , let us realize that whatever good this set-up achieved in earlier times , now the corporation per se cannot take economic leadership . Businesses must develop as a result of the ideas , energies and ambitions of an individual having purpose and comprehensive ability within one mind . When we `` forced '' individuals to assume the corporate structure by means of taxes and other legal statutes , we adopted what I would term `` pseudo-capitalism '' and so took a major step toward socialism . The biggest loss , of course , was the individual's lessened desire and ability to give his services to the growth of his company and our economy . Socialism , I grant , has a definite place in our society . But let us not complain of the evils of capitalism by referring to a form that is not truly capitalistic . Some forms of capitalism do indeed work -- superb organizations , a credit to any society . But the pseudo-capitalism which dictates our whole economy as well as our politics and social life , will not stand close scrutiny . Its pretense to operate in the public interest is little more than a sham . It serves only its own stockholders and poorly at that . As a creative enterprise , its abilities are primarily in `` swallowing '' creative enterprises developed outside its own organization ( an ability made possible by us , and almost mandatory ) . As to benefits to employees , it is notorious for its callous disregard except where it depends on them for services . The corporation in America is in reality our form of socialism , vying in a sense with the other socialistic form that has emerged within governmental bureaucracy . But while the corporation has all the disadvantages of the socialist form of organization ( so cumbersome it cannot constructively do much of anything not compatible with its need to perpetuate itself and maintain its status quo ) , unluckily it does not have the desirable aspect of socialism , the motivation to operate for the benefit of society as a whole . So we are faced with a vast network of amorphous entities perpetuating themselves in whatever manner they can , without regard to the needs of society , controlling society and forcing upon it a regime representing only the corporation's needs for survival . The corporation has a limited , specific place in our society . Ideally speaking , it should be allowed to operate only where the public has a great stake in the continuity of supply or services , and where the actions of a single proprietor are secondary to the needs of society . Examples are in public utilities , making military aircraft and accessories , or where the investment and risk for a proprietorship would be too great for a much needed project impossible to achieve by any means other than the corporate form , e.g. constructing major airports or dams . Thus , if corporations are not to run away with us , they must become quasi-governmental institutions , subject to public control and needs . In all other areas , private initiative of the `` proprietorship '' type should be urged to produce the desired goods and services . Proprietorship Avoiding runaway technology can be done only by assuring a humane society ; ; and for this human beings must be firmly in control of the economics on which our society rests . Such genuine human leadership the proprietorship can offer , corporations cannot . It can project long-range goals for itself . Corporations react violently to short-range stimuli , e.g. , quarterly and annual dividend reports . Proprietorships can establish a unity and integrity of control ; ; corporations , being more amorphous , cannot . Proprietorships can establish a meaningful identity , representing a human personality , and thus establish sincere relationships with customers and community . Corporations are apt by nature to be impersonal , inhumane , shortsighted and almost exclusively profit-motivated , a picture they could scarcely afford to present to the public . The proprietor is able to create a leadership impossible in the corporate structure with its board of directors and stockholders . Leadership is lacking in our society because it has no legitimate place to develop . Men continuously at the head of growing enterprises can acquire experiences of the most varied , complicated and trying type so that at maturation they have developed the competence and willingness to accept the personal responsibility so sorely needed now . Hence government must establish greater controls upon corporations so that their activities promote what is deemed essential to the national interest . Proprietorships should get the tax advantages now accruing to corporations , e.g. the chance to accumulate capital so vital for growth . Corporations should pay added taxes , to be used for educational purposes ( not necessarily of the formal type ) . The right to leave legacies should be substantially reduced and ultimately eliminated . To perpetuate wealth control led by small groups of individuals who played no role in its creation prevents those with real initiative from coming to the fore , and is basically anti-democratic . When the proprietor dies , the establishment should become a corporation until it is either acquired by another proprietor or the government decides to drop it . Strikes should be declared illegal against corporations because disagreements would have to be settled by government representatives acting as controllers of the corporation whose responsibility to the state would now be defined against proprietorship because employees and proprietors must be completely interdependent , as they are each a part of the whole . Strikes threatening the security of the proprietorship , if internally motivated , prevent a healthy relationship . Certainly external forces should not be applied arbitrarily out of mere power available to do so . If we cannot stop warfare in our own economic system , how can we expect to abolish it internationally ? ? One kind of proprietorship These proposals would go far toward creating the economic atmosphere favoring growth of the individual , who , in turn , would help us to cope with runaway technology . Individual human strength is needed to pit against an inhuman condition . The battle is not easy . We are tempted to blame others for our problems rather than look them straight in the face and realize they are of our own making and possible of solution only by ourselves with the help of desperately needed , enlightened , competent leaders . Persons developed in today's corporations cannot hope to serve here -- a judgment based on experiences of my own in business and in activities outside . In my own company , in effect a partnership , although legally a corporation , I have been able to do many things for my employees which `` normal '' corporations of comparable size and nature would have been unable to do . Also , I am convinced that if my company were a sole proprietorship instead of a partnership , I would have been even abler to solve long-range problems for myself and my fellow-employees . Any abilities I may have were achieved in their present shape from experience in sharing in the growth and control of my business , coupled with raising my family . This combined experience , on a foundation of very average , I assure you , intelligence and background , has helped me do things many well-informed people would bet heavily against . Perhaps a list of some of the `` practices '' of my company will help here . The company grew out of efforts by two completely inexperienced men in their late twenties , neither having a formal education applicable to , or experience in , manufacturing or selling our type of articles . From an initial investment of $1,200 in 1943 , it has grown , with no additional capital investment , to a present value estimated by some as exceeding $10,000,000 ( we don't disclose financial figures to the public ) . Its growth continues steadily on a par with past growth ; ; and no limitation is in evidence . Our pin-curl clips and self-locking nuts achieved dominance in just a few years time , despite substantial , well established competition . During the last years of Woodrow Wilson's administration , a red scare developed in our country . Many Americans reacted irrationally to the challenge of Russia and turned to the repression of ideas by force . Postmaster General Burleson set about to protect the American people against radical propaganda that might be spread through the mails . Attorney General Palmer made a series of raids that sent more than 4,000 so-called radicals to the jails , in direct violation of their constitutional rights . Then , not many years later , the Un-American Activities Committee , under the leadership of Martin Dies , pilloried hundreds of decent , patriotic citizens . Anyone who tried to remedy some of the most glaring defects in our form of democracy was denounced as a traitorous red whose real purpose was the destruction of our government . This hysteria reached its height under the leadership of Senator Joseph McCarthy . Demagogues of this sort found communist bogeys lurking behind any new idea that would run counter to stereotyped notions . New ideas were dangerous and must be repressed , no matter how . Those who would suppress dangerous thoughts , credit ideas with high potency . They give strict interpretation to William James' statement that `` Every idea that enters the mind tends to express itself '' . They seem to believe that a person will act automatically as soon as he contacts something new . Hence , the only defensible procedure is to repress any and every notion , unless it gives evidence that it is perfectly safe . Despite this danger , however , we are informed on every hand that ideas , not machines , are our finest tools ; ; they are priceless even though they cannot be recorded on a ledger page ; ; they are the most valuable of commodities -- and the most salable , for their demand far exceeds supply . So all-important are ideas , we are told , that persons successful in business and happy in social life usually fall into two classes : those who invent new ideas of their own , and those who borrow , beg , or steal from others . Seemingly , with an unrestricted flow of ideas , all will be well , and we are even assured that `` an idea a day will keep the sheriff away '' . That , however , may also bring the police , if the thinking does not meet with social approval . Criminals , as well as model citizens , exercise their minds . Merely having a mental image of some sort is not the all-important consideration . Of course , there must be clarity : a single distinct impression is more valuable than many fuzzy ones . But clarity is not enough . The writer took a class of college students to the state hospital for the mentally ill in St. Joseph , Missouri . An inmate , a former university professor , expounded to us , logically and clearly , that someone was pilfering his thoughts . He appealed to us to bring his case to the attention of the authorities that justice might be done . Despite the clarity of his presentation , his idea was not of Einsteinian calibre . True , ideas are important , perhaps life's most precious treasures . But have we not gone overboard in stressing their significance ? ? Have we not actually developed idea worship ? ? Ideas we must have , and we seek them everywhere . We scour literature for them ; ; here we find stored the wisdom of great minds . But are all these works worthy of consideration ? ? Can they stand rigid scrutiny ? ? Shakespeare's wit and wisdom , his profound insight into human nature , have stood the test of centuries . But was he infallible in all things ? ? What of his treatment of the Jew in The Merchant Of Venice ? ? Shakespeare gives us a vivid picture of Shylock , but probably he never saw a Jew , unless in some of his travels . The Jews had been banished from England in 1290 and were not permitted to return before 1655 , when Shakespeare had been dead for thirty-nine years . If any had escaped expulsion by hiding , they certainly would not frequent the market-place . Shakespeare did not usually invent the incidents in his plays , but borrowed them from old stories , ballads , and plays , wove them together , and then breathed into them his spark of life . Rather than from a first-hand study of Jewish people , his delineation of Shylock stems from a collection of Italian stories , Il Pecorone , published in 1558 , although written almost two centuries earlier . He could learn at second hand from books , but could not thus capture the real Jewish spirit . Harris J. Griston , in Shaking The Dust From Shakespeare ( 216 ) , writes : `` There is not a word spoken by Shylock which one would expect from a real Jew '' . He took the story of the pound of flesh and had to fasten it on someone . The Jew was the safest victim . No Jew was on hand to boycott his financially struggling theater . It would have been unwise policy , for instance , to apply the pound-of-flesh characterization to the thrifty Scotchman . Just as now anyone may hurl insults at a citizen of Mars , or even of Tikopia , and no senatorial investigation will result . Who cares about them ! ! Shakespeare does not tell us that Shylock was an aberrant individual . He sets him forth as being typical of the group . He tells of his `` Jewish heart '' -- not a Shylockian heart ; ; but a Jewish heart . This would make anyone crafty and cruel , capable of fiendish revenge . There is no justification for such misrepresentation . If living Jews were unavailable for study , the Bible was at hand . Reading the Old Testament would have shown the dramatist that the ideas attributed to Shylock were abhorrent to the Jews . Are we better off for having Shakespeare's idea of Shylock ? ? Studying The Merchant Of Venice in high school and college has given many young people their notions about Jews . Does this help the non-Jew to understand this group ? ? Thomas De Torquemada , Inquisitor-General of the Spanish Inquisition , put many persons to death . His name became synonymous with cold-blooded cruelty . Would we gain by keeping alive his memory and besmirching today's Roman Catholics by saying he had a Catholic heart ? ? Let his bones and his memory rest in the fifteenth century where they belong ; ; he is out of place in our times . Shakespeare's Shylock , too , is of dubious value in the modern world . Ideas , in and of themselves , are not necessarily the greatest good . A successful businessman recently prefaced his address to a luncheon group with the statement that all economists should be sent to the hospitals for the mentally deranged where they and their theories might rot together . Will his words come to be treasured and quoted through the years ? ? Frequently we are given assurance that automatically all ideas will be sifted and resifted and in the end only the good ones will survive . But is that not like going to a chemistry laboratory and blindly pouring out liquids and powders from an array of bottles and then , after stirring , expecting a new wonder drug inevitably to result ? ? What of the efficiency of this natural instrument of free discussion ? ? Is there some magic in it that assures results ? ? When Peter B. Kyne ( Pride Of Palomar , 43 ) informed us in 1921 that we had an instinctive dislike for the Japanese , did the heated debates of the Californians settle the truth or falsity of the proposition ? ? The Leopard's Spots came from the pen of Thomas Dixon in 1902 , and in this he announced an `` unchangeable '' law . If a child had a single drop of Negro blood , he would revert to the ancestral line which , except as slaves under a superior race , had not made one step of progress in 3,000 years . That doctrine has been accepted by many , but has it produced good results ? ? In the same vein , a certain short-story plot has been overworked . The son and heir of a prominent family marries a girl who has tell-tale shadows on the half-moons of her finger nails . In time she presents her aristocratic husband with a coal-black child . Is the world better for having this idea thrust upon it ? ? Will argument and debate decide its truth or falsity ? ? For answers to such questions we must turn to the anthropologists , the biologists , the historians , the psychologists , and the sociologists . Long ago they consigned the notions of Kyne and Dixon to the scrap heap . False ideas surfeit another sector of our life . For several generations much fiction has appeared dealing with the steprelationship . The stepmother , almost without exception , has been presented as a cruel ogress . Children , conditioned by this mistaken notion , have feared stepmothers , while adults , by their antagonistic attitudes , have made the role of the substitute parents a difficult one . Debate is not likely to resolve the tensions and make the lot of the stepchild a happier one . Research , on the other hand , has shown many stepmothers to be eminently successful , some far better than the real mothers . Helen Deutsch informed us ( The Psychology Of Women , Vol. 2 , , 434 ) that in all cultures `` the term ' stepmother ' automatically evokes deprecatory implications '' , a conclusion accepted by many . Will mere debate on that proposition , even though it be free and untrammeled , remove the dross and leave a residue of refined gold ? ? That is questionable , to say the least . Research into several cultures has proven her position to be a mistaken one . Most assuredly ideas are invaluable . But ideas , just for the sake of having them , are not enough . In the 1930's , cures for the depression literally flooded Washington . For a time the President received hundreds of them every day , most of them worthless . Ideas need to be tested , and not merely by argument and debate . When some question arises in the medical field concerning cancer , for instance , we do not turn to free and open discussion as in a political campaign . We have recourse to the scientifically-trained specialist in the laboratory . The merits of the Salk anti-polio vaccine were not established on the forensic platform or in newspaper editorials , but in the laboratory and by tests in the field on thousands of children . Our presidential campaigns provide much debate and argument . But is the result new barnsful of tested knowledge on the basis of which we can with confidence solve our domestic and international problems ? ? Man , we are told , is endowed with reason and is capable of distinguishing good from bad . But what a super-Herculean task it is to winnow anything of value from the mud-beplastered arguments used so freely , particularly since such common use is made of cliches and stereotypes , in themselves declarations of intellectual bankruptcy . We are reminded , however , that freedom of thought and discussion , the unfettered exchange of ideas , is basic under our form of government . Assuredly in our political campaigns there is freedom to think , to examine any and all issues , and to speak without restraint . No holds are barred . But have the results been heartening ? ? May we state with confidence that in such an exhibition a republic will find its greatest security ? ? We must not forget , to be sure , that free discussion and debate have produced beneficial results . In truth , we can say that this broke the power of Senator Joseph McCarthy , who was finally exposed in full light to the American people . If he had been `` liquidated '' in some way , he would have become a martyr , a rallying point for people who shared his ideas . Debate in the political arena can be productive of good . But it is a clumsy and wasteful process : it can produce negative results but not much that is positive . Debate rid us of McCarthy but did not give us much that is positive . It did something to clear the ground , but it erected no striking new structure ; ; it did not even provide the architect's plan for anything new . In the field of the natural sciences , scientifically verified data are quite readily available and any discussion can be shortened with good results . In the field of the social sciences a considerable fund of tested knowledge has been accumulated that can be used to good advantage . By no means would we discourage the production of ideas : they provide raw materials with which to work ; ; they provide stimulations that lead to further production . We would establish no censorship . The President's personality would have opened that office to him . And for the first time a representative of the highest office in the land would have been liable to the charge that he had attempted to make it a successorship by inheritance . It is testimony to the deep respect in which Mr. Eisenhower was held by members of all parties that the moral considerations raised by his approach to the matter were not explicitly to be broached . These began to be apparent in a press conference held during the second illness in order that the consulting specialists might clarify the President's condition for the nation . And if Howard Rutstein felt impelled thereafter to formulate the ethics of the medical profession , his article in the Atlantic Monthly accomplished a good deal more . It forced us to fix the responsibility for the position in which all medical commentators had been placed . The discussion of professional ethics inevitably reminded us that in the historical perspective the President's decision will finally clarify itself as a moral , rather than a medical , problem . Because the responsibility for resolving the issue lay with the President , rather than with his doctors , nothing raises more surely for us the difficulties simple goodness faces in dealing with complex moral problems under political pressure . For the President had dealt with the matter humbly , in what he conceived as the democratic way . But the problem is one which gives us the measure of a man , rather than a group of men , whether a group of doctors , a group of party members assembled at a dinner to give their opinion , or the masses of the voters . Any attempt to reconcile this statement of the central issue in the campaign of 1956 with the nature of the man who could not conceive it as the central issue will at least resolve our confusions about the chaotic and misleading results of the earnestness of both doctors and President in a situation which should never have arisen . It was a response to the conflict between political pressure and the moral intuition which resulted in attempts at prediction . In no other situation would a group of doctors , struggling competently to improve the life expectancy of a man beloved by the world , be subjected to such merciless and persistent questioning , and before they were prepared to demonstrate the kind of verbal precision which alone can clarify for mankind the problems it faces . And though we can look back now and see their errors , we can look back also to the ultimate error . It recurred in the press conferences : the President's remarks about his running developed a singular tone , one which we find in few statements made by public individuals on such a matter . The press conference became a stage which betrayed the drift of his private thinking , rather than his convictions . He commented -- thoughtfully , a reporter told us -- that it was `` not too important for the individual how he ends up '' . He gave us a simile to explain his admission that even at the worst period of his second illness it never occurred to him there was any renewed question about his running : as in the Battle of the Bulge , he had no fears about the outcome until he read the American newspapers . Yet the attitude that the fate of the Presidency demands in such a situation is quite distinct from the simple courage that can proceed with battles to be fought , regardless of the consequences . In this case others should not have had to raise the doubts and fears . The Presidency demands an incisive awareness of the larger implications of the death of any incumbent . It is of the utmost importance to the people of America and of the world how their governing President `` ends up '' during the four years of his term . Only when that term is ended and he is a private citizen again can he be permitted the freedom and the courage to discount the dangers of his death . Ironically enough , in this instance such personal virtues were a luxury . At the national and international level , then , what is the highest kind of morality for the private citizen represents an instance of political immorality . And we had the uneasy sense that the cleavage between the moral and the political progressed amid the events which concern us . For the tone of the editorials which greeted Mr. Eisenhower's original announcement of his running had been strangely disquieting . Neither the vibrant enthusiasm which bespeaks a people's intuitive sense of the fitness of things at climactic moments nor the vital argumentation betraying its sense that something significant has transpired was in evidence . Nothing testifies more clearly to that cleavage than the peculiar editorial page appearing in a July issue of Life Magazine , the issue which also carried the second announcement of the candidacy . The double editorial on Two Aspects Of `` The U.S. Spirit '' was subtly calculated to suggest a moral sanction for gambles great as well as small , reflecting popular approval of this questionable attitude toward the highest office in the land . `` The Moral Creed '' and `` The Will To Risk '' live happily together , if we do not examine where the line is to be drawn . `` I may possibly be a greater risk than is the normal person of my age '' , the President had said on February 29th of the election year , ignoring the fact that no one of his age had ever lived out another term . `` My doctors assure me that this increased percentage of risk is not great '' . But by the time the risk was doubled , events had dismissed from his mind both increased percentages and a previously stated intention of considering carefully anything more serious than a bout of influenza . Only infrequently did the situation color his thinking . Ironically no president we have had would have regretted more than President Eisenhower the possibility to which his own words , in the press conference held at the beginning of August , testified : that unable as he was himself to say his running was best for the country , unconsciously he had placed his party before his nation . So it is that we relive his opening statement in the first television address with the dramatic immediacy of the present . No consideration of risk urges itself upon him now : for this is what the mind does with the ideas on which it has not properly focussed . Yet with a mind less shallow , if less sharp , than some of the fortune-happy syndicates which back him , he feels what he cannot formulate ; ; and we watch him amid the overtones which suggest he could never in any conscience urge a risk upon the voters . Moving as he is into the phase of the campaign which demands conviction of him , he adopts a position that is morally indefensible . He ascribes to the mercy of God the peace which this personal matter -- the assurance that he can physically sustain the burden of the office longer than any individual in the history of our nation has been able to do -- has brought him . What is simply an opinion formed in defiance of the laws of human probability , whether or not it is later confirmed , has become by September of the election year `` a firm conviction '' . As a means of silencing a discussion which ought to have taken place , the statement is an effective one : we sympathize with the universal confusion which gives rise to such convictions . But it is also the climax to one of the absorbing chapters in our current political history . In assigning to God the responsibility which he learned could not rest with his doctors , Eisenhower gave evidence of that weakening of the moral intuition which was to characterize his administration in the years to follow . In any other man this reassurance to the electorate would have caused us a profound moral shock . About this man we had to think twice . We knew that it was , as reassurance , the ironic fruit of a deeply moral nature . But the fact remains that even the unconscious acceptance of himself as a man of destiny divinely protected must be censored in any man who evades the responsibility for his major decisions , and thus for imposing his will on the people . And in the context of drifting personal utterances we have examined , there was occasional evidence of the origin of all such evasions . When the possibility that he had not given reconsideration to so weighty a decision seemed to disconcert his questioners , Mr. Eisenhower was known to make his characteristic statement to the press that he was not going to talk about the matter any more . Thinking had stopped ; ; it was not to be resumed . The portrait that had developed , fragmentarily but consistently , was the portrait of a man to whom serious thinking is alien enough that the making of a decision inhibits , when it does not forestall , any ability to review the decision in the light of new evidence . This does not mean that the decision to run for office should inevitably have been revoked . Instead it means that the thinking in which decision issues has the power to determine the morality of the decision , as in this instance the pressure for renewed practical or legislative attention to the constitutional problems the decision had uncovered might have done . Drifting through a third illness , apparently without any provision for the handling of a major national emergency other than a talk with the vice-president , Eisenhower revealed the singularly static quality of his thinking . Despite three warnings , no sense of moral urgency impelled him to distinguish his situation , and thus his responsibilities , from Wilson's . By contrast , the energetic reaction of the leader to the full demands his decision imposes upon him strengthens the moral intuition and gives us the measure of the man . Only by means of an intensive preoccupation with the detailed considerations following from any decision can he ensure attention to the practical details to be dealt with if the implications of immorality in the major decision are effectively to be checked . In the incessant struggle with recalcitrant political fact he learns to focus the essence of a problem in the significant detail , and to articulate the distinctions which clarify the detail as significant , with what is sometimes astounding rapidity . Like Lincoln , he can distinguish his relation to God from the constitutional responsibilities a questionable decision exacts of him . Like Roosevelt , he can distinguish an attitude toward a Russian leader he may share with a host of Americans from the responsibilities diplomatic convention may impose upon him . He chooses to subordinate one to the other , sometimes reluctantly , accepting criticism for the lesser immoralities facts breed . The very nature of a choice so grounded in distinction and fact leads to the valid convictions which become force of will in the manifest leader . The capacity for making the distinctions of which diplomacy is compact , and the facility with language which can render them into validity in the eyes of other men are the leader's means for transforming the moral intuition into moral leadership . The making of distinctions , like the perception of the great distinctions made , is an inordinately difficult business . Lincoln's slow progress towards the several marking his achievement is even now unrecognizable as such , and loosely interpreted as the alternation of inconsistency with vision . But because it is the function of the mind to turn the one into the other by means of the capacities with which words endow it , we do not unwisely examine the type of distinction , in the sphere of politics , on which decisions hang . Only recently , and perhaps because a television debate can so effectively dramatize President Kennedy's extraordinary mastery of detail , have the abilities on which the capacity for making distinctions depend begun to be clearly discernible at the level of politics . In his recent evaluation of Kennedy's potentialities for leadership , Walter Lippmann has cited the `` precision '' of his mind , his `` immense command '' of factual detail , and his `` instinct for the crucial point '' as impressive in the extreme ; ; and it is surely clear that the first of these is the result of the way in which the individual's command of language interacts with the other two . For this change is not a change from one positive position to another , but a change from order and truth to disorder and negation . The liberal-conservative division , we might observe in passing , is not of itself directly involved in a private interest conflict nor even in struggle between ruling groups . Rather it is rooted in a difference of response to the threat of social disintegration . The division is not between those who wish to preserve what they have and those who want change . Rather it is a division established by two absolutely different ways of thought with regard to man's life in society . These ways are absolutely irreconcilable because they offer two different recipes for man's redemption from chaos . The civilizational crisis , the third type of change raises the question `` what are we to do '' ? ? On the most primitive level . For the answer cannot be derived from any socially cohesive element in the disrupting community . There is no socially existential answer to the question . For the truth formerly experienced by the community no longer has existential status in the community , nor does any answer elaborated by philosophers or theoriticians . In this phase of change , no idea has social acceptance and so none has ontological status in the community . An interregnum ensues in which not men but ideas compete for existence . If we examine the three types of change from the point of view of their internal structure we find an additional profound difference between the third and the first two , one that accounts for the notable difference between the responses they evoke . The first two types of change occur within the inward and immanent structure of the society . The first involves a simple shift of interests in the society . The second involves something deeper , but its characteristic form focuses on a shift in policy for the community , not in the truth on which the community rests . Thus in both types attention is focused on the community itself , and its phenomenological life . The third type , however , wrenches attention from the life of action and interests in the community and focuses it on the ground of being on which the community depends for its existence . Voegelin has analyzed this experience in the case of the stable , healthy community . There the community , faced with the need to formulate policy on the level of absolute justice , can find the answer to its problem in the absolute truth which it holds as partially experienced . This , however , cannot be done by a community whose very experience of truth is confused and incoherent : it has no absolute standard , and consequently cannot distinguish the absolute from the contingent . It has lost its ground of being and floats in a mist of appearances . Relativism and equality are its characteristic diseases . Precisely at the moment when it has lost its vision the mind of the community turns out from itself in a search for the ontological standard whereby it can measure itself . For paradigmatic history `` breaks '' rather than unfolds precisely when the movement is from order to disorder , and not from one order to a new order . The liberal-conservative split , to define it further , derives from a basic difference concerning the existential status of standard sought and about the spiritual experience that leads to its identification . When disruptive change has penetrated to the third level of social order , the process of disruption rapidly reaches a point of no return . Indeed , it is probable that this point is reached the moment the third level of change begins . At that point we reach the `` closed '' historical situation : the situation in which man is no longer free to return to a status quo ante . At that point men become aware of the mystery of history called variously `` fate '' , or `` destiny '' , or `` providence '' , and feel themselves caught helplessly in the writhing of a disrupted society . The reasons for this experience are rooted in the metaphysical characteristics of such a change . Of all forms of being , society , or community , has the greatest element of determinability . Its ontological status is itself most tenuous because apart from individual men , who are its `` matter '' , tradition , the `` form '' of society exists only as a shared perception of truth . The ontological status of society thus is constituted by the psychological status of society's members . The content of that psychological status determines , ultimately , the content of civilization . Those social , civilizational factors not rooted in the human spirit of the group , ultimately cease to exist . Civilization itself -- tradition -- falls out of existence when the human spirit itself becomes confused . Civilization is what man has made of himself . Its massive contours are rooted in the simple need of man , since he is always incomplete , to complete himself . It is not enough for man to be an ontological esse . He needs existential completion , he needs , that is , to move in the direction of completion . And the direction of that movement is determined by his perception of the truth about himself . He must , consequently , exist as a self-perceived substantive , developing agent , or he does not exist as man . Thus , it is no mystical intuition , but an analyzable conception to say that man and his tradition can `` fall out of existence '' . This happens at the moment man loses the perception of moral substance in himself , of a nature that , in Maritain's words , is perceived as a `` locus of intelligible necessities '' . An existentialist is a man who perceives himself only as `` esse '' , as existence without substance . Thus human perception and human volition is the immanent cause of all social change and this most truly when the change reaches the civilizational level . Thus with regard to the loss of tradition , in the change from order to disorder the metaphysics of change works itself out as a disruption of the individual soul , a change in which man continues as an objective ontological existent , but no longer as a man . Further , change is a form of motion , it occurs as the act of a being in potency insofar as it is in potency and has not yet reached the terminus of the change . With regard to the change we are examining , the question is , at what point does the change become irreversible ? ? A number of considerations suggest that this occurs early in the process . Change involves the displacement of form . This means that the inception of change itself can begin only when the factors conducive to change have already become more powerful than those anchoring the existent form in being . If the existent form is to be retained new factors that reinforce it must be introduced into the situation . In the case of social decay , form is displaced simply by the process of dissolution with no form at the terminus of the process . Now in the mere fact of the beginning of such displacement we have prima-facie evidence of the ontological weakness of the fading form . And when we consider the tenuous hold tradition has on existence , any weakening of that hold constitutes a crisis of existence . The retention of a tradition confronted with such a crisis necessitates the introduction of new spiritual forces into the situation . However , the crisis occurs precisely as a weakening of spiritual forces . It would seem , therefore , that in a civilizational crisis man cannot save himself . The emergence of the crisis itself would seem to constitute a warranty for the victory of disorder . And it would seem that history is a witness to this truth . As a further characterization of the liberal conservative split we may observe that it involves differences in the formula for escaping inevitabilities in history . These differences , in turn , derive from prior differences concerning the friendly or hostile character of change . Unanalyzed responses anxiety and deep insecurity are the characteristic responses evoked by the crisis in tradition . To experience them , it is not necessary for a people to be actively aware of what is happening to it . The process of erosion need only undermine the tradition and a series of consequences begin unfolding within the individual , while in institutions a quiet but deep transformation of processes occurs . Within the individual the reaction has been called various names , all , however , pointing to the same basic experience . Weil identifies it as being `` rootless '' , Guardini as being `` placeless '' , Riesman as being `` lonely '' . Others call it `` alienation '' , and mean by that no simple economic experience ( as Marx does ) but a deep spiritual sense of dislocation . Within institutions there is a marked decline of the process of persuasion and the substitution of a force-fear process which masquerades as the earlier one of persuasion . We note the use of rhetoric as a weapon , the manipulation of the masses by propaganda , the `` mobilization '' of effort and resources . Within this context of spontaneous and unanalyzed responses to the experience of civilizational crisis , two basic organizations of response are observable : reaction and ideological progressivism . These responses are explicable in terms of characteristics inherent in the crisis . Both are predictably destined to fail . The response of reaction is dominated by a concern for what is vanishing . Its essence lies in its attempt to recover previous order through the repression of disruptive forces . To this end political authority is called upon to exercise its negative and coercive powers . The implicit assumption of this response is that history is reversible . Seemingly , order is perceived as a kind of subsistent entity now covered by adventitious accretions . The problem is to remove the accretions and thereby uncover the order that was always there . Such a response , of course , misses the point that in crisis order is going out of existence . Moreover its posture of stubborn but simple resistance is doomed to failure because of the metaphysical weakness of the existent form of order , once the activation of change has reached visible proportions . The most reaction can achieve is stasis , and a stasis that can be maintained only by the expenditure of an effort which ultimately exhausts itself . Despite the hopelessness of the response , it is explicable in terms of the crisis of tradition itself . Since a civilizational crisis involves also a crisis in private interests and in the ruling class , reaction is normally found among those who feel themselves to be among the ruling class . Their great error is to mingle the responses typical of each of the three types of change . Since civilizational change is the most difficult to perceive and analyze , it seldom is given adequate attention . And the anxiety it generates is misinterpreted as anxiety over private interest and threatened social status . The basic truth in the reactionary response is to be found in its realistic assumption of the primacy of the real over the ideational . But this truth is distorted by its extreme application : the assumption of the separate existence of tradition . The reactionary misses the point that tradition exists ontologically only in the form of psychological-intellectual relations . Reactionary theories , for this reason , usually assume some form of organismic theory . In its defensive formulations , the theory will attack conscious change on the grounds of the independent existence of the community . In its dynamic form , it visualizes the community as the embodiment of an ontological force -- the race , for instance , which unfolds in history . In both cases the individual tends to be treated as an instrument of the organic reality . When the reactionary response is thus bolstered by an intellectual defense , the characteristics of that defense are explicable only in terms of the basic attitudes of unanalyzed reaction . Reaction is rooted in a perception of tradition as a whole . It is a total situation that is defended : the `` good old days '' . There is no selectivity ; ; even the questionable features of the past are defended . The point is that the reactionary , for whatever motive , perceives himself to have been part or a partner of something that extended beyond himself , something which , consequently , he was not able to accept or reject on the basis of subjective preference . The reactionary is confused about the existential status of a decaying tradition , but he does perceive the unity tradition had when it was healthy . All of which brings up another problem in the use of psychoanalytic insight in a literary work . Is the Oedipus complex , the clinical syndrome , material for a tragedy ? ? If we remove ourselves for a moment from our time and our infatuation with mental disease , isn't there something absurd about a hero in a novel who is defeated by his infantile neurosis ? ? I am not making a clinical judgment here , for such personal tragedies are real and are commonplace in the analyst's consulting room , but literature makes a different claim upon our sympathies than tragedy in life . A man in a novel who is defeated in his childhood and condemned by unconscious forces within him to tiredly repeat his earliest failure in love , only makes us a little weary of man ; ; his tragedy seems unworthy and trivial . Now we can argue that the irresistible fate of Oedipus Rex was nothing more than the irresistible unconscious longings of Oedipus projected outward , but this externalization of unconscious conflict makes all the difference between a story and a clinical case history . We can also argue that the three brothers Karamazov and Smerdyakov were the external representatives of an internal conflict within one man , Dostoevsky , a conflict having to do with father-murder and the wish to possess the father's woman . But a novel in which one man Karamazov explored the divisions within his personality would scarcely merit publication in the Psychoanalytic Quarterly . It is a mistake to look upon the Oedipus of Oedipus Complex as a literary descendant of Oedipus Rex . Whatever the psychological truth in the Oedipus myth , an Oedipus who is drawn to his fate by irresistible external forces can carry the symbol of humanity and its archaic crime , and the incest that is unknowing renews the mystery of the eternal dream of childhood and absorbs us in the secret . But a modern Oedipus who is doomed because he cannot oppose his own childhood is only pathetic , and for renouncing the mystery in favor of psychological truth he gives up the claim on our sympathies . I am suggesting that a case-history approach to the Oedipus complex is a blind alley for a storyteller . The best gifts of the novelist will be wasted on the reader who is insulated against any surprises the novelist may have in store for him . Incest is still a durable theme , but if it wants to get written about it will have to find ways to surprise the emotions , and there is no better way to do this than that of concealment and symbolic representation . And the best way to conceal and disguise the elements of an incest story is not to set out to write an incest story . Which brings to mind another Lawrence story and some interesting comparisons in the treatment of the Oedipal theme . `` The Rocking Horse Winner '' is also a story about a boy's love for his mother . If I now risk some comparisons with Sons And Lovers let it be clear that I am not comparing the two works or judging their merits ; ; I am only singling out differences in treatment of a theme and the resultant effects . `` The Rocking Horse Winner '' is a fantasy with extraordinary power to disturb the reader -- but we do not know why . It is the story of the hopeless love of a little boy for his cold and vain mother . There are ghostly scenes in which the little boy on his rocking horse rocks madly toward the climax that will magically give him the name of the winning horse . The child grows rich on his winnings and conspires with his uncle to make secret gifts of his money to his mother . The story ends in the child's illness and delirium brought on by the feverish compulsion to ride his horse to win for his mother . The child dies with his mourning mother at his bedside . I had read the story many times without asking myself why it affected me or caring why it did . But on one occasion when I encountered a similar fantasy in a little boy who was my patient I began to understand the uncanny effects of this story . It was , of course , a little boy's fantasy of winning his mother to himself , and replacing the father who could not give her the things she wanted -- a classical oedipal fantasy if you like -- but if it were only this the story would be banal . Why does the story affect us ? ? How does the rocking exert its uncanny effect upon the reader ? ? The rocking is actually felt in the story , a terrible and ominous rhythm that prophesies the tragedy . The rocking , I realized , is the single element in the story that carries the erotic message , the unspoken and unconscious undercurrent that would mar the innocence of a child's fantasy and disturb the effects of the work if it were made explicit . The rocking has the ambiguous function of keeping the erotic undercurrent silent and making it present ; ; it conceals and yet is suggestive ; ; a perfect symbol . And if we understand the rocking as an erotic symbol we can also see how well it serves as the symbol of impending tragedy . For this love of the boy for his mother is a hopeless and forbidden love , doomed by its nature . We are also struck by the fact that this story of a boy's love for his mother does not offend , while the incestuous love of the man , Paul Morel , sometimes repels . It's easy to see why . This love belongs to childhood ; ; we accord it its place there , and in Lawrence's treatment we are given the innocent fantasy of a child , in fact , the form in which oedipal love is expressed in childhood . And when the child dies in Lawrence's story in a delirium that is somehow brought on by his mania to win and to make his mother rich , the manifest absurdity of such a disease and such a death does not enter into our thoughts at all . We have so completely entered the child's fantasy that his illness and his death are the plausible and the necessary conclusion . I am sure that none of the effects of this story were consciously employed by Lawrence to describe an oedipal fantasy in childhood . It is most probable that Freud and the Oedipus complex never entered his head in the writing of this story . He was simply writing a story that wanted to be told , and in the writing a childhood fantasy of his own emerged . He would not have cared why it emerged , he only wanted to capture a memory to play with it again in his imagination and somehow to fix and hold in the story the disturbing emotions that accompanied the fantasy . In our own time we have seen that the novelist's debt to psychoanalysis has increased but that the novel itself has not profited much from this marriage . Ortega's hope that modern psychology might yet bring forth a last flowering of the novel has only been partially fulfilled . The young writer seems intimidated by psychological knowledge ; ; he has lost confidence in his own eyes and in the validity of his own psychological insights . He borrows the insights of psychology to improve his impaired vision but cannot bring to his work the distinctive vision that should be a novelist's own . He has been seduced by the marvels of the unconscious and has lost interest in studying the surfaces of character . If many of the characters in contemporary novels appear to be the bloodless relations of characters in a case history it is because the novelist is often forgetful today that those things that we call character manifest themselves in surface behavior , that the ego is still the executive agency of personality , and that all we know of personality must be discerned through the ego . The novelist who has been badly baptized in psychoanalysis often gives us the impression that since all men must have an Oedipus complex all men must have the same faces . 2 . I have argued that Oedipus of the Oedipus complex has a doubtful future as a tragic figure in literature . But a writer who has a taste for irony and who sees incest in all its modern dimensions can let his imagination work on the disturbing joke in the incest myth , the joke that strikes right at the center of man's humanness . Moral dread is seen as the other face of desire , and here psychoanalysis delivers to the writer a magnificent irony and a moral problem of great complexity . There is probably some significance in the fact that two of the best incest stories I have encountered in recent years are burlesques of the incest myth . The ancient types are reassembled in gloom and foreboding to be irresistibly drawn to their destinies , but the myth fails before the modern truth ; ; the oracle speaks false and the dream speaks true . In both the farmer's tale in Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man and in Thomas Mann's The Holy Sinner , the incest hero rises above the myth by accepting the wish as motive ; ; the heroic act is the casting off of pretense . Thomas Mann wrote The Holy Sinner in 1951 . It was conceived as a leave-taking , a kind of melancholy gathering-in of the myths of the West , `` bevor die Nacht sinkt , eine lange Nacht vielleicht und ein tiefes Vergessen '' . He chose a medieval legend of incest , Gregorius Vom Stein , and freely borrowed and parodied other myths of the West , mixing themes , language , peoples and times in a master myth in which the old forms continually renew themselves , as in his previous treatment of Joseph . But The Holy Sinner is not simply a retelling of old stories for an old man's entertainment . Mann understood better than most men the incest comedy at the center of the myth and the psychological truth in which dread is shown as the other face as longing was for him just the kind of deep and complicated joke he liked to tell . And when he retold the legend of Gregorius he interpolated a modern version in which the medieval players speak contemporary thoughts in archaic language ; ; while they move through the pageantry of the ancient incest myth and cover themselves through not-knowing , they reveal the unconscious motive in seeking each other and in the last scene make an extraordinary confession of guilt in the twentieth-century manner . Grigorss is the child of an incestuous union between a royal brother and sister , the twins Sibylla and Wiligis . He is born in secrecy after the death of his father and cast adrift soon after birth . The infant is discovered by a fisherman who brings him home to rear him . An ivory tablet in the infant's cask recounts the story of his sinful origins and is preserved for the child by the monks of a monastery in the fishing village . Grigorss , at seventeen , learns his story and goes forth as a knight to uncover his origins . His sailing vessel is guided by fate to the shores of his own country at a time when Sibylla's domain is overrun by the armies of one of her rejected suitors . Grigorss overcomes the suitor in battle , delivers the city from its oppressors and marries Sibylla who had fallen in love with the beautiful knight the moment she saw him . Sibylla is pregnant with their second child when she finds the ivory tablet concealed by her husband , and the identities of mother and son are revealed . Grigorss goes off to do penance on a rock for seventeen years . At the end of this period two pious Christians in Rome receive the revelation which leads them to seek the next Pope on the rock . Grigorss comes to Rome and becomes a great and beloved Pope . In the last pages of the book Sibylla comes to Rome to seek an audience with the great Pope and to give her confession . Mother and son recognize each other and , in Mann's version of this legend , make a remarkable confession of guilt to each other , the confession of unconscious motive and unconscious knowledge of their true identities from the time they had first set eyes on each other . In recollection he has said : `` Natural or man-made objects kept coming into my head , but I would suppress them sternly '' . Moreover , he organized the movement of his forms , within his rigorously shaped space , into highly complex equilibriums ; ; and used gradations of color value as well as sharply contrasting elementary colors . The worthy Mondrian , seeing these pictures , said in a tone of kindly reproof : `` But you are really an artist of the naturalistic tradition '' ! ! Helion did not realize it at the time , but it was true . His `` monumental '' abstraction , made up of smooth , metallic `` non-objects '' acting upon each other with great tension , won Helion much acclaim during the 'thirties . The play of novel lighting effects also entered into these compositions , whose controlled power and varied activity made them well worth meditating . As Helion's work showed more and more nostalgia for the world of man and nature , the pure abstractionists expressed some disapproval ; ; but Leger , Arp , Lipchitz and Alexander Calder , at the time , gave him their blessing . His canvases nowadays bore titles frankly declaring them to be `` Figures In Space '' , or `` Blue Figure '' , or `` Pink Figure '' ; ; and they had ( vaguely ) heads and feet . Exhibited in shows in London in 1935 , and in New York the following year , the new , more elaborated abstracts were much favored in the circles of the modernists as three-dimentional dramas of great intellectual coherence . At this period the thirty-year old Helion was ranked `` as one of the mature leaders of the modern movement '' , according to Herbert Read , `` and in the direct line of descent from Cezanne , Seurat , Gris and Leger '' . In America , Meyer Schapiro observed that , unlike the Mondrian school , Helion `` sought a return path to the fullness of nature within the framework of abstract art '' . It is notable that at this time he was writing with admiration of Cimabue's and Poussin's way of filling space . Abstract art was still the right path for him ; ; but , he held , instead of continuing as an `` art of reduction '' , it must grow , must make a place for the contributions of the Raphaels and Poussins as well as for those of the early cubists and Mondrian . Later Helion wrote of this phase : `` For years I built for myself a subtle instrument of relationships -- colors and forms without a name . I played on it my secret songs , unexplained , passionate and peaceful '' . But his own work was evolving further . The extreme limitations he sensed in all current abstract art made that seem to him increasingly arid and cold . He was engaged in constant experiments that searched for new directions . Where would it all lead ? ? He himself did not know , as he said in 1935 . But he was `` afraid of the future -- he would in fact welcome a way back to social integration , a functional art of some kind '' . During the 1920's the Abstractionists , the German Bauhaus group of industrial designers , and the new architects all had the dream of some well ordered utopia , or welfare state , in which their neat and logical constructions might find their proper place . But whereas the postwar American abstractionists seem to Helion to be determined to `` escape '' from the real world , or simply to rebel against it , the ordered abstractions which he and his associates of the 1930's were painting embodied the hope of `` improving '' things . `` We were possessed by visions of a new civilization to come , very pure and elevated '' , he has said , `` in fact some ideal form of socialism such as we had dreamed of since the war of 1914-1918 '' . Instead of this the 1930's witnessed a tragic economic depression , the rise of Fascist dictators in Europe , the wasting Civil War in Spain . Very much the political man , Helion felt himself deeply affected by the increasingly pessimistic atmosphere of France and all Europe , whose foundations seemed to him more and more shaky . In 1936 he decided to migrate to America . The Rooseveltian America was a haven of liberalism and progress and seemed to him to constitute the last best hope for civilization . Helion also hoped that America's mastery of technology and industrial efficiency would be accompanied by the production of new and beautiful art works . `` I arrived in the United States with the idea of establishing myself there more or less permanently and finding inspiration for new compositions '' . In New York he was well received by what was then only a small brave band of non-figurative artists , including Alexander Calder , George K. L. Morris , De Kooning , Holty and a few others . After a year in a studio on Sheridan Square , having married an American girl who was a native of Virginia , Helion moved to a village in the Blue Ridge mountains , where he produced some of the most imposing of his abstract canvases . The darkening world scene , at the time of the Munich Pact , continued to trouble his mind even in his remote Virginia studio . `` Fear possessed me , and the certainty of war '' , he has related . `` I truly smelled blood , death , heaps of corpses everywhere '' . In haste he labored to finish some last abstract paintings : a three-panel frieze , with a flying figure and a fallen figure ; ; a `` Double-Figure '' , which went to the Chicago Art Institute , and is considered by him the most successful of his abstracts ; ; and in early 1939 , a `` Fallen Figure '' of very ominous character , which concluded his abstract phase . `` I knew I was carrying on with abstraction to its very end -- for me '' , he said of the two years' output in Virginia . With those paintings of big constructions crashing down , he felt he could stop . They were , in effect his last testament to non-objective art . He had taken out first papers for American citizenship ; ; but after war came to Europe , he decided to return to France , arriving there in January , 1940 . `` I hated the war '' , he said , `` but thought I ought to go because I was , perhaps , one of those who hadn't done enough to prevent it '' . In June , 1940 , Sergeant Helion , with a company of reserve troops waiting to go into battle , was sketching the hills south of the Loire River , when the war suddenly rolled in upon him . Its first apparition was a long , gloomy column of refugees riding in farm wagons , or pushing prams . His company then carried out a confused retreating movement until it was surrounded by the Germans , a few days before France capitulated . After a sort of death march during four days without food , Helion and his comrades were shipped by cattle-car to a labor camp at an estate farm in East Germany . A year later they were removed to a Stalag in the harbor of Stettin . At the time of his capture Helion had on his person a sketchbook he had bought at Woolworth's in New York . When he was stripped , deloused and numbered by his guards , his much-thumbed sketchbook was seized and thrown on a pile of prisoners' goods to be confiscated . `` It was then I knew that they were making war against Man , the individual within ! ! -- who questioned things when given orders '' . At Stettin the university-educated artist , who had studied German , was chosen to serve as interpreter and clerk in the office of the Stalag commander . In secret he also acted as a member of the prisoners' Central Committee , which plotted sabotage , planned a few escapes , and maintained a hidden control over the wretched French slave-laborers . In the Stalag , Helion came to know and love his comrades , most of them plain folk , who , in their extremity , showed true courage and ran great risks to help each other . How much they esteemed him is shown by the fact that their underground committee selected him as one of the few who would be helped to escape . In the prison camp's Black Market civilian clothes were quietly bought and forged papers were devised for him ; ; during long weeks the plan for his flight was rehearsed . Every morning contingents of prisoners would be sent out to labor in nearby factories . One evening , while a volley-ball game was being played in the yard among the prisoners remaining there , a simulated melee was staged -- just as the gates were opened to admit other prisoners returning from work . As Helion wrote afterward : `` Their sentry followed . Four hands were stretched toward me by my comrades behind me . Marquet held my briefcase ; ; Finot held a wallet with my money and papers ; ; Moineau and David held nothing but their fingers . They felt rough and kind and warm . At this moment the volley-ball hit the ground . Duclos ran toward Desprez with fists raised . The guards all rushed up to intervene '' Shedding his prison cloak , Helion shot through the gates , now clad in civilian garments and with the passport of a Flemish worker . Riding trains , hitching hikes on trucks across Germany , slipping through guarded frontiers with the help of secret guides , he eventually reached Vichy France , and , by the winter of 1943 , was back in Virginia . He wrote : `` To escape from a prison camp required a very special state of mind ; ; not only loathing of captivity , but a faith , a hope that is even stronger . I left behind me brave men , whom captivity had robbed of all hope . They too loved their families , longed for their villages : yet lacked the faith that drove one to dare the fearful chance of escape '' . It was a time of revelations for him . Even the most rational of men , under great stress , may be transported by a new faith and behave like mystics . Helion knew that he owed his freedom as much to the self-sacrifice of his fellow-men in Arbeitskommando 13 , , Stettin , as to his own fierce will and love of life . After that , he declared , `` to return to freedom was to fall to one's knees before the real world and adore it '' . In prison he had been able to sketch nothing but figures from life , his guards , his companions in misery . Now all his desires centered on `` rediscovering and singing of the prosaic and yet beautiful world of men and objects so long barred from me by a barbed wire fence '' . And , he added : `` During the many months in prison camp , all abstract images vanished from my mind '' . Before leaving for America , he happened to see his old friend Jean Arp and confided to him his new resolutions . Arp protested : `` But it is impossible ! ! Everything in the way of representation has already been done by the old masters '' . Helion , however , clung to the belief that `` in escaping from the Stalag I had also escaped from Abstraction '' . While convalescing in his Virginia home he wrote a book recording his prison experiences and escape , entitled : They Shall Not Have Me Published originally in ( Helion's ) English by Dutton & Co. of New York , in 1943 , the book was received by the press as a work of astonishing literary power and one of the most realistic accounts of World War 2 , from the French side . It was very widely read , too ; ; and the author , who seemed the embodiment of France's rising spirit of resistance to her conquerors , was much complimented for his daring military action . But when he showed his new figurative pictures to his artist friends of the abstract camp , they paid him no compliments and drew long faces . Between 1944 and 1947 Helion had a series of one-man shows -- at the Paul Rosenberg Gallery in New York and in Paris -- of his new realistic pictures . They reincarnated the figures of human beings banished from his canvases since the 1920's . These new pictures focussed on the familiar and commonplace objects that he had heard the men in his prison camp talking about as the things they missed most , hence associated with the sense of lost freedom : the cafe at the corner , the newspaper kiosk , the girls in doorways and windows along the street , the golden-crusted French bread they lacked , the cigarettes denied them . One of the pictures was of a man with hat drawn over his face ceremoniously lighting a cigarette ; ; others were of men doffing their hats to each other , carrying umbrellas with pomp , reading newspapers , or simply showing loaves of bread spread out . Important as was Mr. O'Donnell's essay , his thesis is so restricting as to deny Faulkner the stature which he obviously has . He and also Mr. Cowley and Mr. Warren have fallen to the temptation which besets many of us to read into our authors -- Nathaniel Hawthorne , for example , and Herman Melville -- protests against modernism , material progress , and science which are genuine protests of our own but may not have been theirs . Faulkner's total works today , and in fact those of his works which existed in 1946 when Mr. Cowley made his comment , or in 1939 , when Mr. O'Donnell wrote his essay , reveal no such simple attitude toward the South . If he is a traditionalist , he is an eclectic traditionalist . If he condemns the recent or the present , he condemns the past with no less force . If he sees the heroic in a Sartoris or a Sutpen , he sees also -- and he shows -- the blind and the mean , and he sees the Compson family disintegrating from within . If the barn-burner's family produces a Flem Snopes , who personifies commercialism and materialism in hyperbolic crassness , the Compson family produces a Jason Compson 4 . Faulkner is a most untraditional traditionalist . Others writing on Faulkner have found the phrase `` traditional moralist '' either inadequate or misleading . Among them are Frederick J. Hoffman , William Van O'Connor , and Mrs. Olga Vickery . They have indicated the direction but they have not been explicit enough , I believe , in pointing out Faulkner's independence , his questioning if not indeed challenging the Southern tradition . Faulkner's is not the mind of the apologist which Mr. O'Donnell implies that it is . He is not one to remain more comfortably and unquestioningly within a body of social , cultural , or literary traditions than he was within the traditions -- or possibly the regulations -- governing his tenure in the post office at Oxford , Mississippi , thirty-five years ago . That is not to deny that he has been aware of traditions , of course , that he is steeped in them , in fact , or that he has dealt with them , in his books . It is to say rather , I believe , that he has brought to bear on the history , the traditions , and the lore of his region a critical , skeptical mind -- the same mind which has made of him an inveterate experimenter in literary form and technique . He has employed from his section rich immediate materials which in a loose sense can be termed Southern . The fact that he has cast over those materials the light of a skeptical mind does not make him any the less Southern , I rather think , for the South has been no more solid than other regions except in the political and related areas where patronage and force and intimidation and fear may produce a surface uniformity . Some of us might be inclined to argue , in fact , that an independence of mind and action and an intolerance of regimentation , either mental or physical , are particularly Southern traits . There is no necessity , I suppose , to assert that Mr. Faulkner is Southern . It would not be easy to discover a more thoroughly Southern pedigree than that of his family . And , after all , he has lived comfortably at both Oxford , Mississippi , and Charlottesville , Virginia . The young William Faulkner in New Orleans in the 1920's impressed the novelist Hamilton Basso as obviously conscious of being a Southerner , and there is no evidence that since then he has ever considered himself any less so . Besides showing no inclination , apparently , to absent himself from his native region even for short periods , and in addition writing a shelf of books set in the region , he has handled in those books an astonishingly complete list of matters which have been important in the South during the past hundred years . It is more difficult with Faulkner than with most authors to say what is the extent and what is the source of his knowledge . His own testimony is that he has read very little in the history of the South , implying that what he knows of that history has come to him orally and that he knows the world around him primarily from his own unassisted observation . His denials of extensive reading notwithstanding , it is no doubt safe to assume that he has spent time schooling himself in Southern history and that he has gained some acquaintance with the chief literary authors who have lived in the South or have written about the South . To believe otherwise would be unrealistic . But in looking at Faulkner against his background in Mississippi and the South , it is important not to lose the broader perspective . His earliest work reflected heavy influences from English and continental writers . Evidence is plentiful that early and later also he has been indebted to the Gothic romancers , who deal in extravagant horror , to the symbolists writing at the end of the preceding century , and in particular to the stream-of-consciousness novelists , Henry James and James Joyce among them . His repeated experimentation with the techniques of fiction testifies to an independence of mind and an originality of approach , but it also shows him touching at many points the stream of literary development back of him . My intention , therefore , is not to say that Faulkner's awareness has been confined within the borders of the South , but rather that he has looked at his world as a Southerner and that presumably his outlook is Southern . The ingredients of Faulkner's novels and stories are by no means new with him , and most of the problems he takes up have had the attention of authors before him . A useful comment on his relation to his region may be made , I think , by noting briefly how in handling Southern materials and Southern problems he has deviated from the pattern set by other Southern authors while remaining faithful to the essential character of the region . The planter aristocracy has appeared in literature at least since John Pendleton Kennedy published Swallow-Barn in 1832 and in his genial portrait of Frank Meriwether presiding over his plantation dominion initiated the most persistent tradition of Southern literature . The thoroughgoing idealization of the planter society did not come , however , until after the Civil War when Southern writers were eager to defend a way of life which had been destroyed . As they looked with nostalgia to a society which had been swept away , they were probably no more than half-conscious that they painted in colors which had never existed . Their books found no less willing readers outside than inside the South , even while memories of the war were still sharp . The tradition reached its apex , perhaps , in the works of Thomas Nelson Page toward the end of the century , and reappeared undiminished as late as 1934 in the best-selling novel So Red The Rose , by Stark Young . Although Faulkner was the heir in his own family to this tradition , he did not have Stark Young's inclination to romanticize and sentimentalize the planter society . The myth of the Southern plantation has had only a tangential relation with actuality , as Francis Pendleton Gaines showed forty years ago , and I suspect it has had a far narrower acceptance as something real than has generally been supposed . Faulkner has found it useful , but he has employed it with his habitual independence of mind and skeptical outlook . Without saying or seeming to say that in portraying the Sartoris and the Compson families Faulkner's chief concern is social criticism , we can say nevertheless that through those families he dramatizes his comment on the planter dynasties as they have existed since the decades before the Civil War . It may be that in this comment he has broken from the conventional pattern more violently than in any other regard , for the treatment in his books is far removed from even the genial irony of Ellen Glasgow , who was the only important novelist before him to challenge the conventional picture of planter society . Faulkner's low-class characters had but few counterparts in earlier Southern novels dealing with plantation life . They have an ancestry extending back , however , at least to 1728 , when William Byrd described the Lubberlanders he encountered in the back country of Virginia and North Carolina . The chief literary antecedents of the Snopes clan appeared in the realistic , humorous writing which originated in the South and the Southwest in the three decades before the Civil War . These narratives of coarse action and crude language appeared first in local newspapers , as a rule , and later found their way between book covers , though rarely into the planters' libraries beside the morocco-bound volumes of Horace , Mr. Addison , Mr. Pope , and Sir Walter Scott . There is evidence to suggest , in fact , that many authors of the humorous sketches were prompted to write them -- or to make them as indelicate as they are -- by way of protesting against the artificial refinements which had come to dominate the polite letters of the South . William Gilmore Simms , sturdy realist that he was , pleaded for a natural robustness such as he found in his favorites the great Elizabethans , to vivify the pale writings being produced around him . Simms admired the raucous tales emanating from the backwoods , but he had himself social affiliations which would not allow him to approve them fully . Augustus Baldwin Longstreet , a preacher and a college and university president in four Southern states , published the earliest of these backwoods sketches and in the character Ransy Sniffle , in the accounts of sharp horse-trading and eye-gouging physical combat , and in the shockingly unliterary speech of his characters , he set an example followed by many after him . Others who wrote of low characters and low life included Thomas Bangs Thorpe , creator of the Big Bear Of Arkansas and Tom Owen , the Bee-Hunter ; ; Johnson Jones Hooper , whose character Simon Suggs bears a close kinship to Flem Snopes in both his willingness to take cruel advantage of all and sundry and the sharpness with which he habitually carried out his will ; ; and George Washington Harris , whose Tennessee hillbilly character Sut Lovingood perpetrated more unmalicious mischief and more unintended pain than any other character in literature . It would be profitable , I believe , to read these realistic humorists alongside Faulkner's works , the thought being not that he necessarily read them and owed anything to them directly , but rather that they dealt a hundred years ago with a class of people and a type of life which have continued down to our time , to Faulkner's time . Such a comparison reminds us that in employing low characters in his works Faulkner is recording actuality in the South and moreover is following a long-established literary precedent . Such characters , with their low existence and often low morality , produce humorous effects in his novels and tales , as they did in the writing of Longstreet and Hooper and Harris , but it need not be added that he gives them far subtler and more intricate functions than they had in the earlier writers ; ; nor is there need to add that among them are some of the most highly individualized and most successful of his characters . One of the early humorists already mentioned , Thomas Bangs Thorpe , can be used to illustrate another point where Faulkner touches authentic Southern materials and also earlier literary treatment of those materials . Thorpe came to Louisiana from the East as a young man prepared to find in the new country the setting of romantic adventure and idealized beauty . But Thorpe saw also the hardships of pioneer existence , the cultural poverty of the frontier settlements , and the slack morality which abounded in the new regions . As a consequence of the tensions thus produced in his thoughts and feelings , he wrote on the one hand sketches of idealized hunting trips and on the other an anecdote of the village of Hardscrabble , Arkansas , where no one had ever seen a piano ; ; and he wrote also the masterpiece of frontier humor , `` The Big Bear Of Arkansas '' , in which earthy realism is placed alongside the exaggeration of the backwoods tall-tale and the awe with which man contemplates the grandeur and the mysteries of nature . Some years ago Julian Huxley proposed to an audience made up of members of the British Association for the Advancement of Science that `` man's supernormal or extra-sensory faculties are ( now ) in the same case as were his mathematical faculties during the ice age '' . As a Humanist , Dr. Huxley interests himself in the possibilities of human development , and one thing we can say about this suggestion , which comes from a leading zoologist , is that , so far as he is concerned , the scientific outlook places no rigid limitation upon the idea of future human evolution . This text from Dr. Huxley is sometimes used by enthusiasts to indicate that they have the permission of the scientists to press the case for a wonderful unfoldment of psychic powers in human beings . There may be a case of this sort , but it is not one we wish to argue , here . Even if people do , in a not far distant future , begin to read one another's minds , there will still be the question of whether what you find in another man's mind is especially worth reading -- worth more , that is , than what you can read in good books . Even if men eventually find themselves able to look through walls and around corners , one may question whether this will help them to live better lives . There would be side-conclusions to be drawn , of course ; ; such capacities are impressive evidence pointing to a conception of the human being which does not appear in the accounts of biologists and organic evolutionists ; ; but the basic puzzles of existence would still be puzzling , and we should still have to work out the sort of problems we plan to discuss in this article . All we want from Dr. Huxley's statement is the feeling that this is an open world , in the view of the best scientific opinion , with practically no directional commitments as to what may happen next , and no important confinements with respect to what may be possible . It seems quite obvious that all the really difficult tasks of human beings arise from the fact that man is not one , but many . Each man , that is , is both one and many . He is a dreamer of the good society with a plan to put into effect , and he is an individual craftsman with something to make for himself and the people of his time . He is a parent with a child to nurture , here and now , and he is an educator who worries about the children half way round the world . He is a utopian with a stake in tomorrow and he is a vulnerable human made captive by the circumstances of today . He can sacrifice himself for tomorrow and he can sacrifice tomorrow for himself . He is a Craig's wife who agonizes about tobacco ash on the living room rug and he is a forgetful genius who goes boating with the town baker when dignitaries from the local university have come to call . He is the stern guardian of the status quo who has raised the utilitarian structures of the age , and he is the revolutionary poet with a gun in his hand who writes a tragic apologetic to posterity for the men he has killed . What will be the final symmetry of the good society ? ? For what do the utopians labor ? ? Here , on a desk , is a stack of pamphlets representing the efforts of some of the best men of the day to penetrate these questions . The pamphlets are about law , the corporation , forms of government , the idea of freedom , the defense of liberty , the various lethargies which overtake our major institutions , the gap between traditional social ideals and the working mechanisms that have been set in motion for their realization . The thing that is notable in all these discussions is the lack of ideological ardor . There is another kind of ardor , a quiet , sure devotion to the fundamental decencies of human life , but no angry utopian contentions . Actually , you could wish for some passion , now and then , but when you look around the world and see the little volcanos of current history which partisan social passions have wrought , you are glad that in these pamphlets there is at least some civilized calm . You could also say that in these pamphlets is a relieving quality of maturity . There is essential pleasantness in reading the writing of men who are not angry , who can contend without quarreling . This is the good kind of sophistication , and with all our problems and crises this kind of sophistication has flowered in the United States during recent years . A characteristic expression of such concern and inquiry is found in Joseph P. Lyford's Introduction To The Agreeable Autocracies , a recent paperback study of the institutions of modern democratic society . Mr. Lyford gives voice to a temper that represents , we think , an achieved plateau of reflective thinking . After casting about for a way of describing this spirit , we decided that it would be better to use Mr. Lyford's introduction as an illustration . He begins : `` At one time it seemed as if the Soviet Union had done us a favor by providing a striking example of how not to behave towards other peoples and other nations . As things turned out , however , we have not profited greatly from the lesson : instead of persistently following a national program of our own we have often been satisfied to be against whatever Soviet policy seemed to be at the moment . Such activity may or may not have irritated the Kremlin , but it has frequently condemned America to an unnatural defensiveness that has undermined our effort to give leadership to the free world . The defensiveness has been exaggerated by another bad habit , our tendency to rate the `` goodness '' or `` badness '' of other nations by the extent to which they applaud the slogans we circulate about ourselves . Since the slogans have little application to reality and are sanctimonious to boot , the applause is faint even in areas of the world where we should expect to find the greatest affection for free government . Shocked at the response to our proclamations , we grow more defensive , and worse , we lose our sense of humor and proportion . Mr. Nehru is subjected to stern lectures on neutralism by our Department of State , and an American President observes sourly that Sweden would be a little less neurotic if it were a little more capitalistic '' . One thing you can say about Mr. Lyford is that he does not suffer from any insecurity as an American . Those who are insecure fear to be candid in self-examination . Only the strong look squarely at weakness . The maturity in this point of view lies in its recognition that no basic problem is ever solved without being clearly understood . Mr. Lyford continues : `` Even if the self portrait we distribute for popular consumption were accurate it would be dangerous to present it as a picture of the ideal society . We would be ignoring the special circumstances of other countries . The picture is the more treacherous when it misrepresents the facts of American life . The discrepancy between what we commonly profess and what we practice or tolerate is great , and it does not escape the notice of others . If our sincerity is granted , and it is granted , the discrepancy can only be explained by the fact that we have come to believe hearsay and legend about ourselves in preference to an understanding gained by earnest self-examination . What is more , the legends have become so sacrosanct that the very habit of self-examination or self-criticism smells of low treason , and men who practice it are defeatists and unpatriotic scoundrels . Although we continue to pay our conversational devotions to `` free private enterprise '' , `` individual initiative '' , `` the democratic way '' , `` government of the people '' , `` competition of the marketplace '' , etc. , we live rather comfortably in a society in which economic competition is diminishing in large areas , bureaucracy is corroding representative government , technology is weakening the citizen's confidence in his own power to make decisions , and the threat of war is driving him economically and physically into the ground '' . The interesting thing about Mr. Lyford's approach , and the approach of the contributors to The Agreeable Autocracies ( Oceana Publications , 1961 ) to the situation of American civilization , is that it is concerned with comprehending the psychological relationships which are having a decisive effect on American life . In an ideological argument , the participants tend to thump the table . They are determined to prove something . The new spirit , so well illustrated by Mr. Lyford's work , is wholly free of this anxiety . The problem is rather to find out what is actually happening , and this is especially difficult for the reason that `` we are busily being defended from a knowledge of the present , sometimes by the very agencies -- our educational system , our mass media , our statesmen -- on which we have had to rely most heavily for understanding of ourselves '' . The Introduction continues : `` We experience a vague uneasiness about events , a suspicion that our political and economic institutions , like the genie in the bottle , have escaped confinement and that we have lost the power to recall them . We feel uncomfortable at being bossed by a corporation or a union or a television set , but until we have some knowledge about these phenomena and what they are doing to us , we can hardly learn to control them . It does not appear that we will be delivered from our situation by articles on The National Purpose . The Agreeable Autocracies is an attempt to explore some of the institutions which both reflect and determine the character of the free society today . The men who speculate on these institutions have , for the most part , come to at least one common conclusion : that many of the great enterprises and associations around which our democracy is formed are in themselves autocratic in nature , and possessed of power which can be used to frustrate the citizen who is trying to assert his individuality in the modern world '' . These institutions which Mr. Lyford names `` agreeable autocracies '' -- where did they come from ? ? Of one thing we can be sure : they were not sketched out by the revolutionary theorists of the eighteenth century who formulated the political principles and originally shaped the political institutions of what we term the `` free society '' . No doubt there are historians who can explain to a great extent what happened to the plans and projects of the eighteenth century . Going back over this ground and analyzing the composition of forces which have created the present scene is one of the tasks undertaken by the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions , in Santa Barbara . But however we come , finally , to explain and account for the present , the truth we are trying to expose , right now , is that the makers of constitutions and the designers of institutions find it difficult if not impossible to anticipate the behavior of the host of all their enterprises . The host is the flowing life of the human race . This life has its own currents and rhythms , its own multiple cycles and adaptations . On occasion it produces extraordinary novelties . Should Rousseau have been able to leave room in his social theory for the advent of television , atomic energy , and IBM machines ? ? How would Thomas Jefferson feel after reading Factories In The Field ? ? They tell us , sir , that we are free , because we have in one hand a ballot , and in the other a stock certificate . With these we shape our destiny and own private property , and that , sir , makes ours the best of all possible societies . The reality of the situation , however , is described by Mr. Lyford : `` Many of us may even be secretly relieved at having a plausible excuse to delegate ancient civic responsibilities to a new bureaucracy of experts . Thus the member of an industrial union comes to regard his officers as business agents who may proceed without interference or recall ; ; the stockholder delivers his proxy ; ; and the citizen narrows his political participation to the mere act of voting -- if he votes at all '' . Copernicus did not question it , Ptolemy could not . Given the conceptual context within which ancient thought thrived , how could anyone have questioned this principle ? ? The reasons for this are partly observational , partly philosophical , and reinforced by other aesthetic and cultural factors . First , the observational reasons . The obvious natural fact to ancient thinkers was the diurnal rotation of the heavens . Not only did constellations like Draco , Cepheus , and Cassiopeia spin circles around the pole , but stars which were not circumpolar rose and set at the same place on the horizon each night . Nor did a constellation's stars vary in brightness during the course of their nocturnal flights . The conclusion -- the distances of the constellations did not vary and their paths were circular . Moreover , the sun's path over earth described a segment of a great circle ; ; this was clear from the contour of the shadow traced by a gnomon before and after noon . As early as the 6th century B.C. the earth was seen to be spherical . Ships disappear hull-first over the horizon ; ; approaching shore their masts appeared first . Earth , being at the center of the universe , would have the same shape as the latter ; ; so , e.g. did Aristotle argue , although this may not be an observational reason in favor of circularity . The discoid shapes of sun and moon were also felt to indicate the shape of celestial things . In light of all this , one would require special reasons for saying that the paths of the heavenly bodies were other than circular . Why , for example , should the ancients have supposed the diurnal rotation of the heavens to be elliptical ? ? Or oviform ? ? Or angular ? ? There were no reasons for such suppositions then . This , conjoined with the considerations above , made the circular motions of heavenly bodies appear an almost directly observed fact . Additional philosophical considerations , advanced notably by Aristotle , supported further the circularity principle . By distinguishing superlunary ( celestial ) and sublunary ( terrestrial ) existence , and reinforcing this with the four-element physics of Empedocles , Aristotle came to speak of the stars as perfect bodies , which moved in only a perfect way , viz. in a perfect circle . Now what is perfect motion ? ? It must , apparently , be motion without termini . Because motion which begins and ends at discrete places would ( e.g. for Aristotle ) be incomplete . Circular motion , however , since it is eternal and perfectly continuous , lacks termini . It is never motion towards something . Only imcomplete , imperfect things move towards what they lack . Perfect , complete entities , if they move at all , do not move towards what they lack . They move only in accordance with what is in their natures . Thus , circular motion is itself one of the essential characteristics of completely perfect celestial existence . To return now to the four-element physics , a mixture of muddy , frothy water will , when standing in a jar , separate out with earth at the bottom , water on top , and the air on top of that . A candle alight in the air directs its flame and smoke upwards . This gives a clue to the cosmical order of elements . Thus earth has fallen to the center of the universe . It is covered ( partly ) with water , air is atop of that . Pure fire ( the stars ) is in the heavens . When combined with the metaphysical notion that pure forms of this universe are best appreciated when least embodied in a material substratum , it becomes clear that while earth will be dross on a scale of material-formal ratios , celestial bodies will be of a subtle , quickened , ethereal existence , in whose embodiment pure form will be the dominant component and matter will be absent or remain subsidiary . The stars constitute an order of existence different from what we encounter on earth . This is clear when one distinguishes the types of motion appropriate to both regions . A projectile shot up from earth returns rectlinearly to its ' natural ' place of rest . But the natural condition for the heavenly bodies is neither rest , nor rectilinear motion . Being less encumbered by material embodiments they partake more of what is divine . Their motion will be eternal and perfect . Let us re-examine the publicized contrasts between Ptolemaic and Copernican astronomy . Bluntly , there never was a Ptolemaic system of astronomy . Copernicus' achievement was to have invented systematic astronomy . The Almagest and The Hypotheses outline Ptolemy's conception of his own task as the provision of computational tables , independent calculating devices for the prediction of future planetary perturbations . Indeed , in the Halma edition of Theon's presentation of The Hypotheses there is a chart setting out ( under six distinct headings ) otherwise unrelated diagrams for describing the planetary motions . No attempt is made by Ptolemy to weld into a single scheme ( a-la-Aristotle ) , these independent predicting-machines . They all have this in common : the earth is situated near the center of the deferent . But that one should superimpose all these charts , run a pin through the common point , and then scale each planetary deferent larger and smaller ( to keep the epicycles from ' bumping ' ) , this is contrary to any intention Ptolemy ever expresses . He might even suppose the planets to move at infinity . Ptolemy's problem is to forecast where , against the inverted bowl of night , some particular light will be found at future times . His problem concerns longitudes , latitudes , and angular velocities . The distances of these points of light is a problem he cannot master , beyond crude conjectures as to the orderings of the planetary orbits viewed outward from earth . But none of this has prevented scientists , philosophers , and even historians of science , from speaking of the Ptolemaic system , in contrast to the Copernican . This is a mistake . It is engendered by confounding the Aristotelian cosmology in The Almagest with the geocentric astronomy . Ptolemy recurrently denies that he could ever explain planetary motion . This is what necessitates the nonsystematic character of his astronomy . So when textbooks , like that of Baker set out drawings of the ' Ptolemaic System ' , complete with earth in the center and the seven heavenly bodies epicyclically arranged on their several deferents , we have nothing but a misleading 20th-century idea of what never existed historically . It is the chief merit in Copernicus' work that all his planetary calculations are interdependent . He cannot , e.g. compute the retrograde arc traveled by Mars , without also making suppositions about the earth's own motion . He cannot describe eclipses without entertaining some form of a three-body problem . In Ptolemaic terms , however , eclipses and retrograde motion were phenomena simpliciter , to be explained directly as possible resultants of epicyclical combinations . In a systematic astronomy , like that of Copernicus , retrogradations become part of the conceptual structure of the system ; ; they are no longer a puzzling aspect of intricately variable , local planetary motions . Another contrast stressed when discussing Ptolemaic vs. Copernican astronomy , turns on the idea of simplicity . It is often stated that Copernican astronomy is ' simpler ' than Ptolemaic . Some even say that this is the reason for the ultimate acceptance of the former . Thus , Margenau remarks : `` A large number of unrelated epicycles was needed to explain the observations , but otherwise the ( Ptolemaic ) system served well and with quantitative precision . Copernicus , by placing the sun at the center of the planetary universe , was able to reduce the number of epicycles from eighty-three to seventeen . Historical records indicate that Copernicus was unaware of the fundamental aspects of his so-called ' revolution ' , unaware perhaps of its historical importance , he rested content with having produced a simpler scheme for prediction . As an illustration of the principle of simplicity the heliocentric discovery has a peculiar appeal because it allows simplicity to be arithmetized ; ; it involves a reduction in the number of epicycles from eighty-three to seventeen '' . Without careful qualification this can be misleading . If in any one calculation Ptolemy had had to invoke 83 epicycles all at once , while Copernicus never required more than one third this number , then ( in the sense obvious to Margenau ) Ptolemaic astronomy would be simpler than Copernican . But no single planetary problem ever required of Ptolemy more than six epicycles at one time . This , of course , results from the non-systematic , ' cellular ' character of Ptolemaic theory . Calculations within the Copernican framework always raised questions about planetary configurations . These could be met only by considering the dynamical elements of several planets at one time . This is more ambitious than Ptolemy is ever required to be when he faces his isolated problems . Thus , in no ordinary sense of ' simplicity ' is the Ptolemaic theory simpler than the Copernican . The latter required juggling several elements simultaneously . This was not simpler but much more difficult than exercises within Ptolemy's astronomy . Analogously , anyone who argues that Einstein's theory of gravitation is simpler than Newton's , must say rather more to explain how it is that the latter is mastered by student-physicists , while the former can be managed ( with difficulty ) only by accomplished experts . In a sense , Einstein's theory is simpler than Newton's , and there is a corresponding sense in which Copernicus' theory is simpler than Ptolemy's . But ' simplicity ' here refers to systematic simplicity . The number of primitive ideas in systematically-simple theories is reduced to a minimum . The Axioms required to make the theoretical machinery operate are set out tersely and powerfully , so that all permissible operations within the theory can be traced rigorously back to these axioms , rules , and primitive notions . This characterizes Euclid's formulation of geometry , but not Ptolemy's astronomy . There are in The Almagest no rules for determining in advance whether a new epicycle will be required for dealing with abberations in lunar , solar , or planetary behavior . The strongest appeal of the Copernican formulation consisted in just this : ideally , the justification for dealing with special problems in particular ways is completely set out in the basic ' rules ' of the theory . The lower-level hypotheses are never ' ad hoc ' , never introduced ex post facto just to sweep up within the theory some recalcitrant datum . Copernicus , to an extent unachieved by Ptolemy , approximated to Euclid's vision . De Revolutionibus is not just a collection of facts and techniques . It is an organized system of these things . Solving astronomical problems requires , for Copernicus , not a random search of unrelated tables , but a regular employment of the rules defining the entire discipline . Hence , noting the simplicity achieved in Copernicus' formulation does not provide another reason for the acceptance of De Revolutionibus , another reason beyond its systematic superiority . It provides exactly the same reason . 1543 A.D. is often venerated as the birthday of the scientific revolution . It is really the funeral day of scholastic science . Granted , the cosmological , philosophical , and cultural reverberations initiated by the De Revolutionibus were felt with increasing violence during the 300 years to follow . But , considered within technical astronomy , a different pattern can be traced . In what does the dissatisfaction of Copernicus-the-astronomer consist ? ? What in The Almagest draws his fire ? ? Geocentricism per se ? ? No . The formal displacement of the geocentric principle far from being Copernicus' primary concern , was introduced only to resolve what seemed to him intolerable in orthodox astronomy , namely , the ' unphysical ' triplication of centric reference-points : one center from which the planet's distances were calculated , another around which planetary velocities were computed , and still a third center ( the earth ) from which the observations originated . This arrangement was for Copernicus literally monstrous : `` With ( the Ptolemaists ) it is as though an artist were to gather the hands , feet , head and other members for his images from divers models , each part excellently drawn , but not related to a single body ; ; and since they in no way match each other , the result would be a monster rather than a man '' . Copernicus required a systematically integrated , physically intelligible astronomy . His objective was , essentially , to repair those aspects of orthodox astronomy responsible for its deficiencies in achieving these ends . That such deficiencies existed within Ptolemy's theory was not discovered de novo by Copernicus . The critical , rigorous examinations of Nicholas of Cusa and Nicholas of Oresme provided the context ( a late medieval context ) for Nicholas Copernicus' own work . The latter looked backward upon inherited deficiencies . Without abandoning too much , Copernicus sought to make orthodox astronomy systematically and mechanically acceptable . He did not think himself to be firing the first shot of an intellectual revolution . Henrietta's feeling of identity with Sara Sullam was crowned by her discovery of the coincidence that Sara's epitaph in the Jewish cemetery in Venice referred to her as `` the Sulamite '' . Into the texture of this tapestry of history and human drama Henrietta , as every artist delights to do , wove strands of her own intuitive insights into human nature and -- especially in the remarkable story of the attraction and conflict between two so disparate and fervent characters as this pair -- into the relations of men and women : `` In their relations , she was the giver and he the receiver , nay the demander . His feeling always exacted sacrifices from her . One is so accustomed to think of men as the privileged who need but ask and receive , and women as submissive and yielding , that our sympathies are usually enlisted on the side of the man whose love is not returned , and we condemn the woman as a coquette . The very firmness of her convictions and logical clearness of her arguments captivated and stimulated him to make greater efforts ; ; usually , this is most exasperating to men , who expect every woman to verify their preconceived notions concerning her sex , and when she does not , immediately condemn her as eccentric and unwomanly . She had the opportunity that few clever women can resist , of showing her superiority in argument over a man . Women themselves have come to look upon matters in the same light as the outside world , and scarcely find any wrong in submitting to the importunities of a stronger will , even when their affections are withheld . She was exposing herself to temptation which it is best to avoid where it can consistently be done . One who invites such trials of character is either foolhardy , overconfident or too simple and childlike in faith in mankind to see the danger . In any case but the last , such a course is sure to avenge itself upon the individual ; ; the moral powers no more than the physical and mental , can bear overstraining . And , in the last case , a bitter disappointment but too often meets the confiding nature . '' Henrietta was discovering in the process of writing , as the born writer does , not merely a channel for the discharge of accumulated information but a stimulus to the development of the creative powers of observation , insight and intuition . Dr. Isaacs was so pleased with the quality of her biographical study of Sara Sullam that he considered submitting it to the Century Magazine or Harper's but he decided that its Jewish subject probably would not interest them and published it in The Messenger , `` so our readers will be benefited instead '' . Under her father's influence it did not occur to Henrietta that she might write on subjects outside the Jewish field , but she did begin writing for other Anglo-Jewish papers and thus increased her output and her audience . And she wrote the libretto for an oratorio on the subject of Judas Maccabeus performed at the Hanukkah festival which came in December . By her eighteenth birthday her bent for writing was so evident that Papa and Mamma gave her a Life Of Dickens as a spur to her aspiration . Another source of intellectual stimulus was opened to her at that time by the founding of Johns Hopkins University within walking distance of home . It was established in a couple of buildings in the shopping district , with only a few professors , but all eminent men , and a few hundred eager students housed in nearby dwellings . In September '76 Thomas Huxley , Darwin's famous disciple , came from England to speak in a crowded auditorium at the formal opening of the University ; ; and although it was a school for men only , it afforded Henrietta an opportunity to attend its public lectures . In the following year her father undertook to give a course in Hebrew theology to Johns Hopkins students , and this brought to the Szold house a group of bright young Jews who had come to Baltimore to study , and who enjoyed being fed and mothered by Mamma and entertained by Henrietta and Rachel , who played and sang for them in the upstairs sitting room on Sunday evenings . From Philadelphia came Cyrus Adler and Joseph Jastrow . Adler , Judge Sulzberger's nephew , came to study Assyriology . A smart , shrewd and ambitious young man , well connected , and with a knack for getting in the good graces of important people , he was bound to go far . Joseph Jastrow , the younger son of the distinguished rabbi , Marcus Jastrow , was a friendly , round-faced fellow with a little mustache , whose field was psychology , and who was also a punster and a jolly tease . His father was a good friend of Rabbi Szold , and Joe lived with the Szolds for a while . Both these youths , who greatly admired Henrietta , were somewhat younger than she , as were also the neighboring Friedenwald boys , who were then studying medicine ; ; and bright though they all were , they could not possibly compete for her interest with Papa , whose mind -- although he never tried to dazzle or patronize lesser lights with it -- naturally eclipsed theirs and made them seem to her even younger than they were . Besides , Miss Henrietta -- as she was generally known since she had put up her hair with a chignon in the back -- had little time to spare them from her teaching and writing ; ; so Cyrus Adler became interested in her friend Racie Friedenwald , and Joe Jastrow -- the only young man who when he wrote had the temerity to address her as Henrietta , and signed himself Joe -- fell in love with pretty sister Rachel . Henrietta , however , was at that time engaged in a lengthy correspondence with Joe's older and more serious brother , Morris , who was just about her own age and whom she had got to know well during trips to Philadelphia with Papa , when he substituted for Rabbi Jastrow at Rodeph Shalom Temple there during its Rabbi's absence in Europe . Young Morris , who , while attending the University of Pennsylvania , also taught and edited a paper , found time to write Henrietta twenty-page letters on everything that engaged his interest , from the acting of Sarah Bernhardt in Philadelphia to his reactions to the comments of `` Sulamith '' on the Jewish reform movement being promulgated by the Hebrew Union College in Cincinnati . Unlike his younger brother , Joe , he never presumed to address her more familiarly than as `` My dear friend '' , although he praised and envied the elegance and purity of her style . And when he complained of the lack of time for all he wanted to do , Henrietta advised him to rise at five in the morning as she and Papa did . One thing Papa had not taught Henrietta was how to handle a young man as high-spirited and opinionated as herself . She could not resist the opportunity `` of showing her superiority in argument over a man '' which she had remarked as one of the `` feminine follies '' of Sara Sullam ; ; and in her forthright way , Henrietta , who in her story of Sara had indicated her own unwillingness `` to think of men as the privileged '' and `` women as submissive and yielding '' , felt obliged to defend vigorously any statement of hers to which Morris Jastrow took the slightest exception -- he objected to her stand on the Corbin affair , as well as on the radical reforms of Dr. Wise of Hebrew Union College -- until once , in sheer desperation , he wrote that he had given up hope they would ever agree on anything . But that did not prevent him from writing more long letters , or from coming to spend his Christmas vacations with the hospitable , lively Szolds in their pleasant house on Lombard Street . 1880s : `` little women '' `` we've got Father and Mother and each other '' said Beth on the first page of Louisa Alcott's Little Women ; ; and , `` I do think that families are the most beautiful things in all the world '' , burst out Jo some five hundred pages later in that popular story of the March family , which had first appeared when Henrietta was eight ; ; and the Szold family , as it developed , bore a striking resemblance to the Marches . Mr. March , like Benjamin Szold , was a clergyman , although of an indeterminate denomination ; ; and `` Marmee '' March , like Sophie Szold , was the competent manager of her brood of girls , of whom the Marches had only four to the Szolds' five . But the March girls had their counterparts in the Szold girls . Henrietta could easily identify herself with Jo March , although Jo was not the eldest sister . Neither was Henrietta hoydenish like Jo , who frankly wished she were a boy and had deliberately shortened her name , which , like Henrietta's , was the feminine form of a boy's name . But both were high-spirited and vivacious , both had tempers to control , both loved languages , especially English and German , both were good teachers and wrote for publication . Each was her mother's assistant and confidante ; ; and each stood out conspicuously in the family picture . Bertha Szold was more like Meg , the eldest March girl , who `` learned that a woman's happiest kingdom is home , her highest honor the art of ruling it , not as a queen , but a wise wife and mother '' . Bertha , blue-eyed like Mamma , was from the start her mother's daughter , destined for her mother's role in life . Sadie , like Beth March , suffered ill health -- got rheumatic fever and had to be careful of her heart -- but that never dampened her spirits . When her right hand was incapacitated by the rheumatism , Sadie learned to write with her left hand . She wrote gay plays about the girls for family entertainments , like `` Oh , What Fun ! ! A Comedy In Three Acts '' , in which , under `` Personages '' , Henrietta appeared as `` A Schoolmarm '' , and Bertha , who was only a trifle less brilliant in high school than Henrietta had been , appeared as `` Dummkopf '' . Sadie studied piano ; ; played Chopin in the `` Soiree Musicale of Mr. Guthrie's Pupils '' ; ; and she recited `` Hector's Farewell To Andromache '' most movingly , to the special delight of Rabbi Jastrow at his home in Germantown near Philadelphia , where the Szold girls took turns visiting between the visits of the Jastrow boys at the Szolds' in Baltimore . Adele , like Amy , the youngest of the Marches , was the rebellious , mischievous , rather calculating and ambitious one . For Rachel , conceded to be the prettiest of the Szold girls -- and she did make a pretty picture sitting in the grape-arbor strumming her guitar and singing in her silvery tones -- there was no particular March counterpart ; ; but both groups were so closely knit that despite individual differences the family life in both cases was remarkably similar in atmosphere if not entirely in content -- the one being definitely Jewish and the other vaguely Christian . The Szolds , like the Marches , enjoyed and loved living together , even in troubled times ; ; and , as in the March home , any young man who called on the Szolds found himself confronted with a phalanx of femininity which made it rather difficult to direct his particular attention to any one of them . This included Mamma , jolly , generous , and pretty , with whom they all fell in love , just as Papa had first fallen in love with her Mamma before he chose her ; ; and when a young man like Morris Jastrow had enjoyed the Szold hospitality , he felt obliged to send his respects and his gifts not merely to Henrietta , in whom he was really interested , but to all the Szold girls and Mamma . And just as `` Laurie '' Lawrence was first attracted to bright Jo March , who found him immature by her high standards , and then had to content himself with her younger sister Amy , so Joe Jastrow , who had also been writing Henrietta before he came to Johns Hopkins , had to content himself with her younger sister , pretty Rachel . And like Jo March , who saw her sisters Meg and Amy involved in `` lovering '' before herself , Henrietta saw her sisters Rachel and Sadie drawn outside their family circle by the attraction of suitors , Rachel by Joe Jastrow , and Sadie by Max Lobl , a young businessman who would write her romantic descriptions of his trips by steamboat down the Mississippi . This time he was making no mistake . Olgivanna -- in her country the nickname was a respectful form of address -- was not only attractive but shrewd , durable , sensible , and smart . No wonder Wright was enchanted -- no two better suited people ever met . Almost from that day , until his death , Olgivanna was to stay at his side ; ; but the years that immediately followed were to be extraordinarily trying , both for Wright and his Montenegrin lady . It must be granted that the flouting of convention , no matter how well intentioned one may be , is sure to lead to trouble , or at least to the discomfort that goes with social disapproval . Even so , many of the things that happened to Wright and Olgivanna seem inordinately severe . Their afflictions centered on one maddening difficulty : Miriam held up the divorce proceedings that she herself had asked for . Reporters began to trail Miriam everywhere , and to encourage her to make appalling statements about Wright and his doings . Flocks of writs , attachments , and unpleasant legal papers of every sort began to fly through the air . The distracted Miriam would agree to a settlement through her legal representative , then change her mind and make another attack on Wright as a person . At last her lawyer , Arthur D. Cloud , gave up the case because she turned down three successive settlements he arranged . Cloud made an interesting statement in parting from his client : `` I wanted to be a lawyer , and Mrs. Wright wanted me to be an avenging angel . So I got out . Mrs. Wright is without funds . The first thing to do is get her some money by a temporary but definite adjustment pending a final disposition of the case . But every time I suggested this to her , Mrs. Wright turned it down and demanded that I go out and punish Mr. Wright . I am an attorney , not an instrument of vengeance '' . Miriam Noel disregarded the free advice of her departing counselor , and appointed a heavy-faced young man named Harold Jackson to take his place . There were three years of this strange warfare ; ; and during the unhappy time , Miriam often would charge that Wright and Olgivanna were misdemeanants against the public order of Wisconsin . Yet somehow , when officers were prodded into visiting Taliesin to execute the warrants , they would find neither Wright nor Olgivanna at home . This showed that common sense had not died out at the county and village level -- though why the unhappy and obviously unbalanced woman was not restrained remains a puzzle . The misery of Miriam's bitterness can be felt today by anyone who studies the case -- it was hopeless , agonizing , and destructive , with Miriam herself bearing the heaviest burden of shame and pain . To get an idea of the embarrassment and chagrin that was heaped upon Wright and Olgivanna , we should bear in mind that the raids were sometimes led by Miriam in person . One of the most distressing of these scenes occurred at Spring Green toward the end of the open warfare , on a beautiful day in June . At this time Miriam Noel appeared , urging on Constable Henry Pengally , whose name showed him to be a descendant of the Welsh settlers in the neighborhood . A troop of reporters brought up the rear . Miriam was stopped at the Taliesin gate , and William Weston , now the estate foreman , came out to parley . He said that Mr. Wright was not in , and so could not be arrested on something called a peace warrant that Miriam was waving in the air . Miriam now ordered Pengally to break down the gate , but he said he really couldn't go that far . At this point Mrs. Frances Cupply , one of Wright's handsome daughters by his first wife , came from the house and tried to calm Miriam as she tore down a no visitors sign and smashed the glass pane on another sign with a rock . Miriam Noel Wright said , `` Here I am at my own home , locked out so I must stand in the road '' ! ! Then she rounded on Weston and cried , `` You always did Wright's dirty work ! ! When I take over Taliesin , the first thing I'll do is fire you '' . `` Madame Noel , I think you had better go '' , said Mrs. Cupply . `` And I think you had better leave '' , replied Miriam . Turning to the reporters , she asked , `` Did you hear her ? ? ' I think you had better leave ' ! ! And this is my own home '' . In the silence that followed , Miriam walked close to Mrs. Cupply , who drew back a step on her side of the gate . Then , with staring eyes and lips drawn thin , Miriam said to the young woman , `` You are ugly -- uglier than you used to be , and you were always very ugly . You are even uglier than Mr. Wright '' . The animosity expressed by such a scene had the penetrating quality of a natural force ; ; and it gave Miriam Noel a fund of energy like that of a person inspired to complete some great and universal work of art . As if to make certain that Wright would be unable to pay any settlement at all , Miriam wrote to prospective clients denouncing him ; ; she also went to Washington and appealed to Senator George William Norris of Nebraska , the Fighting Liberal , from whose office a sympathetic but cautious harrumphing was heard . Then , after overtures to accept a settlement and go through with a divorce , Miriam gave a ghastly echo of Mrs. Micawber by suddenly stating , `` I will never leave Mr. Wright '' . Under this kind of pressure , it is not surprising that Wright would make sweeping statements to the newspapers . Miriam had not yet goaded him into mentioning her directly , but one can feel the generalized anger in Wright's remarks to reporters when he was asked , one morning on arrival in Chicago , what he thought of the city as a whole . First , Wright said , he was choked by the smoke , which fortunately kept him from seeing the dreadful town . But surely Michigan Avenue was handsome ? ? `` That isn't a boulevard , it's a racetrack '' ! ! Cried Wright , showing that automobiles were considered to be a danger as early as the 1920's . `` This is a horrible way to live '' , Wright went on . `` You are being strangled by traffic '' . He was then asked for a solution of the difficulty , and began to talk trenchant sense , though private anguish showed through in the vehemence of his manner . `` Take a gigantic knife and sweep it over the Loop '' , Wright said . `` Cut off every building at the seventh floor . Spread everything out . You don't need concentration . If you cut down these horrible buildings you'll have no more traffic jams . You'll have trees again . You'll have some joy in the life of this city . After all , that's the job of the architect -- to give the world a little joy '' . Little enough joy was afforded Wright in the spring of 1925 , when another destructive fire broke out at Taliesin . The first news stories had it that this blaze was started by a bolt of lightning , as though Miriam could call down fire from heaven like a prophet of the Old Testament . A storm did take place that night , and fortunately enough , it included a cloudburst that helped put out the flames . Later accounts blamed defective wiring for starting the fire ; ; at any rate , heat grew so intense in the main part of the house that it melted the window panes , and fused the K'ang-si pottery to cinders . Wright set his loss at $200,000 , a figure perhaps justified by the unique character of the house that had been ruined , and the faultless taste that had gone into the selection of the prints and other things that were destroyed . In spite of the disaster , Wright completed during this period plans for the Lake Tahoe resort , in which he suggested the shapes of American Indian tepees -- a project of great and appropriate charm , that came to nothing . Amid a shortage of profitable work , the memory of Albert Johnson's $20,000 stood out in lonely grandeur -- the money had quickly melted away . A series of conferences with friends and bankers began about this time ; ; and the question before these meetings was , here is a man of international reputation and proved earning power ; ; how can he be financed so that he can find the work he ought to do ? ? While this was under consideration , dauntless as ever Wright set about the building of Taliesin 3 . As he made plans for the new Taliesin , Wright also got on paper his conception of a cathedral of steel and glass to house a congregation of all faiths , and the idea for a planetarium with a sloping ramp . Years were to pass before these plans came off the paper , and Wright was justified in thinking , as the projects failed , that much of what he had to show his country and the world would never be seen except by visitors to Taliesin . And now there was some question as to his continued residence there . Billy Koch , who had once worked for Wright as a chauffeur , gave a deposition for Miriam's use that he had seen Olgivanna living at Taliesin . This might put Wright in such a bad light before a court that Miriam would be awarded Taliesin ; ; nor was she moved by a letter from Wright pointing out that if he was not `` compelled to spend money on useless lawyer's bills , useless hotel bills , and useless doctor's bills '' , he could more quickly provide Miriam with a suitable home either in Los Angeles or Paris , as she preferred . Miriam sniffed at this , and complained that Wright had said unkind things about her to reporters . His reply was , `` Everything that has been printed derogatory to you , purporting to have come from me , was a betrayal , and nothing yet has been printed which I have sanctioned '' . What irritated Miriam was that Wright had told the papers about a reasonable offer he had made , which he considered she would accept `` when she tires of publicity '' . From her California headquarters , Miriam fired back , `` I shall never divorce Mr. Wright , to permit him to marry Olga Milanoff '' . Then Miriam varied the senseless psychological warfare by suddenly withdrawing a suit for separate maintenance that had been pending , and asking for divorce on the grounds of cruelty , with the understanding that Wright would not contest it . The Bank of Wisconsin sent a representative to the judge's chambers in Madison to give information on Wright's ability to meet the terms . He said that the architect might reasonably be expected to carry his financial burdens if all harrassment could be brought to an end , and that the bank would accept a mortgage on Taliesin to help bring this about . Miriam said that she must be assured that `` that other woman , Olga , will not be in luxury while I am scraping along '' . This exhausted Wright's patience , and in consequence he talked freely to reporters in a Madison hotel suite . `` Volstead laws , speed laws , divorce laws '' , he said , `` as they now stand , demoralize the individual , make liars and law breakers of us in one way or another , and tend to make our experiment in democracy absurd . If Mrs. Wright doesn't accept the terms in the morning , I'll go either to Tokyo or to Holland , to do what I can . I realize , in taking this stand , just what it means to me and mine '' . Here Wright gave a slight sigh of weariness , and continued , `` It means more long years lived across the social grain of the life of our people , making shift to live in the face of popular disrespect and misunderstanding as I best can for myself and those dependent upon me '' . Next day , word came that Miriam was not going through with the divorce ; ; but Wright stayed in the United States . His mentioning of Japan and Holland had been merely the expression of wishful thinking . No matter what troubles might betide him , this most American of artists knew in his heart he could not function properly outside his native land . In a few weeks Miriam made another sortie at Taliesin , but was repulsed at the locked and guarded gates . More likely , you simply told yourself , as you handed us the book , that it mattered little what we incanted providing we underwent the discipline of incantation . For pride's sake , I will not say that the coy and leering vade mecum of those verses insinuated itself into my soul . Besides , that particular message does no more than weakly echo the roar in all fresh blood . But what you could not know , of course , was how smoothly the Victorian Fitzgerald was to lead into an American Fitzgerald of my own vintage under whose banner we adolescents were to come , if not of age , then into a bright , taut semblance of it . I do not suppose you ever heard of F. Scott Fitzgerald , living or dead , and moreover I do not suppose that , even if you had , his legend would have seemed to you to warrant more than a cluck of disapproval . Neither his appetites , his exacerbations , nor his despair were kin to yours . He might have been the man in the moon for all you could have understood him . But he was no man in the moon to me . Although his tender nights were not the ones I dreamed of , nor was it for yachts , sports cars , tall drinks , and swimming pools , nor yet for money or what money buys that I burned , I too was burning and watching myself burn . The flame was simply of a different kind . It was symbolized ( at least for those of us who recognized ourselves in the image ) by that self-consuming , elegiac candle of Edna St. Vincent Millay's , that candle which from the quatrain where she ensconced it became a beacon to us , but which in point of fact would have had to be as tall as a funeral taper to last even the evening , let alone the night . One should not , of course , pluck the head off a flower and expect its perfume to linger on . Yet this passion for passion , now that I look back on it with passion spent , seems somewhat overblown and operatic , though as a diva Miss Millay perfectly controlled her notes . Only what else was she singing but the old Song of Songs , that most ancient of tunes that nature plays with such unfailing response upon young nerves ? ? Perhaps this is not so little . Perhaps the mere fact that by plucking on the nerves nature can awaken in the most ordinary of us , temporarily anyway , the sleeping poet , and in poets can discover their immortality , is the most remarkable of all the remarkable phenomena to which we can attest ? ? One can see it as humiliating that an extra hormone casually fed into our chemistry may induce us to lay down our lives for a lover or a friend ; ; one can take it as no more than another veil torn from the mystery of the soul . But it could also be looked at from the other end of the spectrum . One could see this chemical determinant as in itself a miracle . In any case , Miss Millay's sweet-throated bitterness , her variations on the theme that the world was not only well lost for love but even well lost for lost love , her constant and wonderfully tragic posture , so unlike that of Fitzgerald since it required no scenery or props , drew from the me that I was when I fell upon her verses an overwhelming yea . But all this , I am well aware , is the bel canto of love , and although I have always liked to think that it was to the bel canto and to that alone that I listened , I know well enough that it was not . If I am to speak the whole truth about my knowledge of love , I will have to stop trying to emulate the transcendant nightingale . There is another side of love , more nearly symbolized by the croak of the mating capercailzie , or better still perhaps by the mute antics of the slug . Whether you experienced the passion of desire I have , of course , no way of knowing , nor indeed have I wished with even the most fleeting fragment of a wish to know , for the fact that one constitutes by one's mere existence so to speak the proof of some sort of passion makes any speculation upon this part of one's parents' experience more immodest , more scandalizing , more deeply unwelcome than an obscenity from a stranger . I recoil from the very thought . At the same time , I am aware that my recoil could be interpreted by readers of the tea leaves at the bottom of my psyche as an incestuous sign , since theirs is a science of paradox : if one hates , they say it is because one loves ; ; if one bullies , they say it is because one is afraid ; ; if one shuns , they say it is because one desires ; ; and according to them , whatever one fancies one feels , what one feels in fact is the opposite . Well , normally abnormal or normally normal , neurotic or merely fastidious ( do the tea-leaf readers , by the way , allow psyches to have moral taste ? ? ) , I have never wanted to know what you knew of passion . You probably would not remember , since you never seemed to remember even the same moments as I , much less their intensity , one sunny midday on Fifth Avenue when you had set out with me for some final shopping less than a week before the wedding you staged for me with such reluctance at the Farm . I can see us now . We had been walking quite briskly , for despite your being so small and me so tall , your stride in those days could easily match mine . We had stopped before a shop window to assess its autumnal display , when you suddenly turned to me , looking up from beneath one of your wrong hats , and with your nervous `` ahem '' ! ! Said : `` There are things I must tell you about this man you are marrying which he does not know himself '' . If you had screamed right there in the street where we stood , I could not have felt more fear . With scarcely a mumble of excuse , I fled . I fled , however , not from what might have been the natural fear of being unable to disguise from you that the things about my bridegroom -- in the sense you meant the word `` things '' -- which you had been galvanizing yourself to tell me as a painful part of your maternal duty were things which I had already insisted upon finding out for myself ( despite , I may now say , the unspeakable awkwardness of making the discovery on principle , yes , on principle , and in cold blood ) because I was resolved , as a modern woman , not to be a mollycoddle waiting for Life but to seize Life by the throat . I had developed too foolproof a facade to be afraid of self-betrayal . What I fled from was my fear of what , unwittingly , you might betray , without meaning to , about my father and yourself . But I can see from this latest trick of memory how much more arbitrary and influential it is than the will . While my memory holds with relentless tenacity , as I cannot too often stress , to my wrongs , when it comes to my shames , it gestures and jokes and toys with chronology like a prestidigitator in the hope of distracting me from them . Just as I was about to enlarge upon my discovery of the underside of the leaf of love , memory , displeased at being asked to yield its unsavory secrets , dashed ahead of me , calling back over its shoulder : `` Skip it . Cut it out '' . But I will not skip it or cut it out . It is not my intention in this narrative to picture myself as a helpless victim moored to the rock of experience and left to the buffetings of chance . If to be innocent is to be helpless , then I had been -- as are we all -- helpless at the start . But the time came when I was no longer innocent and therefore no longer helpless . Helpless in that sense I can never be again . However , I confess my hope that I will be innocent again , not with a pristine , accidental innocence , but rather with an innocence achieved by the slow cutting away of the flesh to reach the bone . For innocence , of all the graces of the spirit , is I believe the one most to be prayed for . Although it is constantly made to look foolish ( too simple to come in out of the rain , people say , who have found in the innocent an impediment ) , it does not mind looking foolish because it is not concerned with how it looks . It assumes that things are as they seem when they seem best , and when they seem worst it overlooks them . To innocence , a word given is a word that will be kept . Instinctively , innocence does unto others as it expects to be done by . But when these expectations are once too often ground into the dust , innocence can falter , since its strength is according to the strength of him who possesses it . The innocence of which I speak is , I know , not incorruptible . But I insist upon believing that even when it is lost , it may , like paradise , be regained . However , it was not of innocence in general that I was speaking , but of perhaps the frailest and surely the least important side of it which is innocence in romantic love . Here , if anywhere , it is not wholly incontrovertible . To you , for instance , the word innocence , in this connotation , probably retained its Biblical , or should I say technical sense , and therefore I suppose I must make myself quite clear by saying that I lost -- or rather handed over -- what you would have considered to be my innocence two weeks before I was legally entitled , and in fact by oath required , to hand it over along with what other goods and bads I had . But to me innocence is far less tangible . I had long since begun to lose my general innocence when I lost my trust in you , but this special innocence I lost before ever I loved , through my discovery that one could tremble with desire and even experience a flaming delight that had nothing , nothing whatever to do with friendship or liking , let alone with love . I knew this knowledge to be corrupting at the time I acquired it ; ; today , these many years later , after all the temptations resisted or yielded to , the weasel satisfactions and the engulfing dissatisfactions since endured , I call it corrupting still . You , I could swear to it , remained innocent in this sense until the end . Yours , but not mine , was an age in which innocence was fostered and carefully -- if not perhaps altogether innocently -- preserved . You had grown up at a time when the most distinguishing mark of a lady was the noli me tangere writ plain across her face . Moreover , because of the particular blot on your family escutcheon through what may only have been one unbridled moment on your grandmother's part , and because you had the lean-to kitchen and trundle bed of your childhood to outgrow , what you obviously most desired with both your conscious and unconscious person , what you bent your whole will , sensibility , and intelligence upon , was to be a lady . Before being daughter , wife , or mother , before being cultured ( a word now bereft both socially and politically of the sheen you children of frontiersmen bestowed on it ) , before being sorry for the poor , progressive about public health , and prettily if somewhat imprecisely humanitarian , indeed first and foremost , you were a lady . There was , of course , more to the portrait of a lady you carried in your mind's eye than the sine qua non of her virtue . A lady , you made clear to me both by precept and example , never raised her voice or slumped in her chair , never failed in social tact ( in heaven , for instance , would not mention St. John the Baptist's head ) , never pouted or withdrew or scandalized in company , never reminded others of her physical presence by unseemly sound or gesture , never indulged in public scenes or private confidences , never spoke of money save in terms of alleviating suffering , never gossiped or maligned , never stressed but always minimized the hopelessness of anything from sin to death itself . With each song he gave verbal footnotes . The songs Sandburg sang often reminded listeners of songs of a kindred character they knew entirely or in fragments . Often these listeners would refer Sandburg to persons who had similar ballads or ditties . In due time Sandburg was a walking thesaurus of American folk music . After he had finished the first two volumes of his Lincoln , Sandburg went to work assembling a book of songs out of hobo and childhood days and from the memory of songs others had taught him . He rummaged , found composers and arrangers , collaborated on the main design and outline of harmonization with musicians , ballad singers , and musicologists . The result was a collection of 280 songs , ballads , ditties , brought together from all regions of America , more than one hundred never before published : The American Songbag . Each song or ditty was prefaced by an author's note which indicated the origin and meaning of the song as well as special interest the song had , musical arrangement , and most of the chorus and verses . The book , published in 1927 , has been selling steadily ever since . As Sandburg said at the time : `` It is as ancient as the medieval European ballads brought to the Appalachian Mountains , it is as modern as skyscrapers , the Volstead Act , and the latest oil well gusher '' . Schopenhauer never learned Sandburg is in constant demand as an entertainer . Two things contribute to his popularity . First , Carl respects his audience and prepares his speeches carefully . Even when he is called upon for impromptu remarks , he has notes written on the back of handy envelopes . He has his own system of shorthand , devised by abbreviations : `` humility '' will be `` humly '' , `` with '' will be `` w '' , and `` that '' will be `` tt '' . The second reason for his popularity is his complete spontaneity with the guitar . It is a mistake , however , to imagine that Sandburg uses the guitar as a prop . He is no dextrous-fingered college boy but rather a dedicated , humble , and bashful apostle of this instrument . At age seventy-four , he became what he shyly terms a `` pupil '' of Andres Segovia , the great guitarist of the Western world . It is not easy to become Segovia's pupil . One needs high talent . Segovia has written about Carl : `` His fingers labor heavily on the strings and he asked for my help in disciplining them . I found that this precocious , grown-up boy of 74 deserved to be taught . There has long existed a brotherly affection between us , thus I accepted him as my pupil . Just as in the case of every prodigy child , we must watch for the efficacy of my teaching to show up in the future -- if he should master all the strenuous exercises I inflicted on him . To play the guitar as he aspires will devour his three-fold energy as a historian , a poet and a singer . One cause of Schopenhauer's pessimism was the fact that he failed to learn the guitar . I am certain that Carl Sandburg will not fall into the same sad philosophy . The heart of this great poet constantly bubbles forth a generous joy of life -- with or without the guitar '' . The public's identification of Carl Sandburg and the guitar is no happenstance . Nor does Carl reject this identity . He is proud of having Segovia for a friend and dedicated a poem to him titled `` The Guitar '' . Carl says it is the greatest poem ever written to the guitar because he has never heard of any other poem to that subtle instrument . `` A portable companion always ready to go where you go -- a small friend weighing less than a freshborn infant -- to be shared with few or many -- just two of you in sweet meditation '' . The New York Herald Tribune's photographer , Ira Rosenberg , tells an anecdote about the time he wanted to take a picture of Carl playing a guitar . Carl hadn't brought his along . Mr. Rosenberg suggested that they go out and find one . `` Preferably '' , said Carl , `` one battered and worn , such as might be found in a pawnshop '' . They went to the pawnshop of Joseph Miller of 1162 Sixth Avenue . `` Mr. Miller was in the shop '' , the Herald Tribune story related , `` but was reluctant to have anybody's picture taken inside , because his business was too ' confidential ' for pictures . `` But after introductions he asked : ' Carl Sandburg ? ? Well you can pose inside . `` He wanted Mr. Sandburg to pose with one of the guitars he had displayed behind glass in the center of his shop , but the poet eyed this somewhat distastefully . ' Kalamazoo guitars ' , he said , ' used by radio hillbilly singers . `` He chose one from Mr. Miller's window , a plain guitar with no fancy polish . While the picture was taken , Mr. Miller's disposition to be generous to Mr. Sandburg increased to the point where he advised , ' I won't even charge you the one dollar rental fee ' '' . A knowledgeable celebrity When someone in the audience rose and asked how does it feel to be a celebrity , Carl said , `` A celebrity is a fellow who eats celery with celerity '' . This has always been Carl's attitude . Lloyd Lewis wrote that when he first knew Carl in 1916 , Sandburg was making $27.50 a week writing features for the Day Book and eating sparse luncheons in one-arm restaurants . He walked home at night for two miles beyond the end of a suburban trolley . When fame came it changed Sandburg only slightly . Lewis remembered another newspaperman asking , `` Carl , have your ideas changed any since you got all these comforts '' ? ? Carl thought the question over slowly and answered : `` I know a starving man who is fed never remembers all the pangs of his starvation , I know that '' . That was all he said , Lewis reports . That was all he had to say . In answer to a New York Times query on what is fame ( `` Thoughts On Fame '' , October 23 , 1960 ) , Carl said : `` Fame is a figment of a pigment . It comes and goes . It changes with every generation . There never were two fames alike . One fame is precious and luminous ; ; another is a bubble of a bauble '' . `` Ah , did you once see Shelley plain '' ? ? The impression you get from Carl Sandburg's home is one of laughter and happiness ; ; and the laughter and the happiness are even more pronounced when no company is present . Carl has been married to Paula for fifty-three years , and he has not made a single major decision without careful consideration and thorough discussion with his wife . Through all these years , Mrs. Sandburg has pointedly avoided the limelight . She has shared her husband's greatness , but only within the confines of their home ; ; it is a dedication which began the moment she met Carl . Mrs. Sandburg received a Phi Beta Kappa key from the University of Chicago and she was busy writing and teaching when she met Sandburg . `` You are the ' Peoples' Poet ' '' was her appraisal in 1908 , and she stopped teaching and writing to devote herself to the fulfillment of her husband's career . She has rarely been photographed with him and , except for Carl's seventy-fifth anniversary celebration in Chicago in 1953 , she has not attended the dozens of banquets , functions , public appearances , and dinners honoring him -- all of this upon her insistence . Even now I will not intrude upon her except to state a few bare facts . The only way to describe Paula Sandburg is to say she is beautiful in a Grecian sense . Her clothes , her hair , everything about her is both graceful and simple . She has small , broad , capable hands and an enormous energy . She is not only a trained mathematician and Classicist , but a good architect . She designed and supervised the building of the Harbert , Michigan , house , most of which was constructed by one local carpenter who carried the heavy beams singly upon his shoulder . As the Sandburg goat herd increased , she also designed the barn alterations to accommodate them . When erosion threatened the foundation of their home in Harbert , Paula Sandburg planted grapevines and arranged the snow fences which helped hold the sands away . She was born Lilian Steichen , her parents immigrants from Luxemburg . Her mother called her Paus'l , a Luxemburg endearment meaning `` pussycat '' . Some of the children of the family could not pronounce this name and called her Paula , a soubriquet Carl liked so much she has been Paula ever since . But neither was Lilian her baptismal name . Her parents , pious Roman Catholics , christened her Mary Anne Elizabeth Magdalene Steichen . `` My mother read a book right after I was born and there was a Lilian in the book she loved and I became Lilian -- and eventually I became Paula '' . Lilian Steichen was an exceptional student . This family of Luxemburg immigrants , in fact , produced two exceptional children . Paula's older brother is Edward Steichen , a talented artist and , for the past half-century , one of the world's eminent photographers . ( Two years ago the photography editor of Vogue Magazine titled his article about Steichen , `` The World's Greatest Photographer '' . ) By the time Lilian had been graduated from public school , her parents were doing quite well . Her mother was a good manager and established a millinery business in Milwaukee . But her father was not enthusiastic about sending young Paula to high school . `` This is no place for a young girl '' , he said . The parents compromised , however , on a convent school and Paula went to Ursuline Academy in London , Ontario . She was pious , too , once kneeling through the night from Holy Thursday to Good Friday , despite the protest of the nuns that this was too much for a young girl . She knelt out of reverence for having read the Meditations of St. Augustine . She read everything else she could get her hands on , including an article ( she thinks it was in the Atlantic Monthly ) by Mark Twain on `` White Slavery '' . Paula was saddened about what was happening to little girls and vowed to kneel no more in Chapel . She had come to a decision . If there was ever a thought in her mind she might devote her life to religion , it was now dispelled . `` I felt that I must devote myself to the ' outside ' world '' . She passed the entrance examinations to the University of Illinois , but during the year at Urbana felt more important events transpired at the University of Chicago . `` And besides , Thorstein Veblen was one of the Chicago professors '' . At the University of Chicago she studied Whitman and Shelley , and became a Socialist . Socialist leaders in Milwaukee recognized her worth , not only because of her dedication but because of her fluency in German , French , and Luxemburg . She once gave a German recitation before a convention of German-language teachers in Milwaukee . Carl and Paula met in Milwaukee in 1907 during Paula's Christmas holiday visit to her parents . Carl was still Charles A. Sandburg . He `` legitimized '' Paula for Lilian Steichen , and it was Paula who insisted on Carl for Charles . Victor Berger , the panjandrum of Wisconsin Socialism and member of Congress , had asked Paula Steichen to translate some of his German editorials into English . Carl , who was stationed in Appleton , Wisconsin , organizing for the Social Democrats , was in Berger's office and made it his business to escort Paula to the streetcar . She left the next day for her teaching job at Princeton , Illinois . ( After graduation from the University of Chicago , Paula taught for two years in the normal school at Valley City , North Dakota , then two years at Princeton ( Illinois ) Township High School . ) By the time the streetcar pulled away , he had fallen in love with Paula . A letter awaited her at Princeton . Paula says that even though Carl's letters usually began , `` Dear Miss Steichen '' , there was an understanding from the beginning that they would become husband and wife . Paula generously lent me one of Carl's love letters , dated February 21 , 1908 , Hotel Athearn , Oshkosh , Wisconsin : `` Dear Miss Steichen : It is a very good letter you send me -- softens the intensity of this guerilla warfare I am carrying on up here . Never until in this work of S-D organization have I realized and felt the attitude and experience of a Teacher . The United States is always ready to participate with the Soviet Union in serious discussion of these or any other subjects that may lead to peace with justice . Certainly it is not necessary to repeat that the United States has no intention of interfering in the internal affairs of any nation ; ; by the same token , we reject any Soviet attempt to impose its system on us or other peoples by force or subversion . Now this concern for the freedom of other peoples is the intellectual and spiritual cement which has allied us with more than forty other nations in a common defense effort . Not for a moment do we forget that our own fate is firmly fastened to that of these countries ; ; we will not act in any way which would jeopardize our solemn commitments to them . We and our friends are , of course , concerned with self-defense . Growing out of this concern is the realization that all people of the Free World have a great stake in the progress , in freedom , of the uncommitted and newly emerging nations . These peoples , desperately hoping to lift themselves to decent levels of living must not , by our neglect , be forced to seek help from , and finally become virtual satellites of , those who proclaim their hostility to freedom . But they must have technical and investment assistance . This is a problem to be solved not by America alone , but also by every nation cherishing the same ideals and in position to provide help . In recent years America's partners and friends in Western Europe and Japan have made great economic progress . The international economy of 1960 is markedly different from that of the early postwar years . No longer is the United States the only major industrial country capable of providing substantial amounts of the resources so urgently needed in the newly developed countries . To remain secure and prosperous themselves , wealthy nations must extend the kind of co-operation to the less fortunate members that will inspire hope , confidence , and progress . A rich nation can for a time , without noticeable damage to itself , pursue a course of self-indulgence , making its single goal the material ease and comfort of its own citizens -- thus repudiating its own spiritual and material stake in a peaceful and prosperous society of nations . But the enmities it will incur , the isolation into which it will descend , and the internal moral and spiritual softness that will be engendered , will , in the long term , bring it to economic and political disaster . America did not become great through softness and self-indulgence . Her miraculous progress in material achievements flows from other qualities far more worthy and substantial : adherence to principles and methods consonant with our religious philosophy ; ; a satisfaction in hard work ; ; the readiness to sacrifice for worthwhile causes ; ; the courage to meet every challenge ; ; the intellectual honesty and capacity to recognize the true path of her own best interests . To us and to every nation of the Free World , rich or poor , these qualities are necessary today as never before if we are to march together to greater security , prosperity and peace . I believe that the industrial countries are ready to participate actively in supplementing the efforts of the developing nations to achieve progress . The immediate need for this kind of co-operation is underscored by the strain in this nation's international balance of payments . Our surplus from foreign business transactions has in recent years fallen substantially short of the expenditures we make abroad to maintain our military establishments overseas , to finance private investment , and to provide assistance to the less developed nations . In 1959 our deficit in balance of payments approached four billion dollars . Continuing deficits of anything like this magnitude would , over time , impair our own economic growth and check the forward progress of the Free World . We must meet this situation by promoting a rising volume of exports and world trade . Further , we must induce all industrialized nations of the Free World to work together to help lift the scourge of poverty from less fortunate . This co-operation in this matter will provide both for the necessary sharing of this burden and in bringing about still further increases in mutually profitable trade . New Nations , and others struggling with the problems of development , will progress only -- regardless of any outside help -- if they demonstrate faith in their own destiny and use their own resources to fulfill it . Moreover , progress in a national transformation can be only gradually earned ; ; there is no easy and quick way to follow from the oxcart to the jet plane . But , just as we drew on Europe for assistance in our earlier years , so now do these new and emerging nations that do have this faith and determination deserve help . Respecting their need , one of the major focal points of our concern is the South-Asian region . Here , in two nations alone , are almost five hundred million people , all working , and working hard , to raise their standards , and in doing so , to make of themselves a strong bulwark against the spread of an ideology that would destroy liberty . I cannot express to you the depth of my conviction that , in our own and free world interest , we must co-operate with others to help these people achieve their legitimate ambitions , as expressed in their different multi-year plans . Through the World Bank and other instrumentalities , as well as through individual action by every nation in position to help , we must squarely face this titanic challenge . I shall continue to urge the American people , in the interests of their own security , prosperity and peace , to make sure that their own part of this great project be amply and cheerfully supported . Free world decisions in this matter may spell the difference between world disaster and world progress in freedom . Other countries , some of which I visited last month , have similar needs . A common meeting ground is desirable for those nations which are prepared to assist in the development effort . During the past year I have discussed this matter with the leaders of several Western nations . Because of its wealth of experience , the Organization for European Economic Cooperation could help with the initial studies needed . The goal is to enlist all available economic resources in the industrialized Free World , especially private investment capital . By extending this help , we hope to make possible the enthusiastic enrollment of these nations under freedom's banner . No more startling contrast to a system of sullen satellites could be imagined . If we grasp this opportunity to build an age of productive partnership between the less fortunate nations and those that have already achieved a high state of economic advancement , we will make brighter the outlook for a world order based upon security and freedom . Otherwise , the outlook could be dark indeed . We face , indeed , what may be a turning point in history , and we must act decisively and wisely . As a nation we can successfully pursue these objectives only from a position of broadly based strength . No matter how earnest is our quest for guaranteed peace , we must maintain a high degree of military effectiveness at the same time we are engaged in negotiating the issue of arms reduction . Until tangible and mutually enforceable arms reduction measures are worked out we will not weaken the means of defending our institutions . America possesses an enormous defense power . It is my studied conviction that no nation will ever risk general war against us unless we should become so foolish as to neglect the defense forces we now so powerfully support . It is world-wide knowledge that any power which might be tempted today to attack the United States by surprise , even though we might sustain great losses , would itself promptly suffer a terrible destruction . But I once again assure all peoples and all nations that the United States , except in defense , will never turn loose this destructive power . During the past year , our long-range striking power , unmatched today in manned bombers , has taken on new strength as the Atlas intercontinental ballistic missile has entered the operational inventory . In fourteen recent test launchings , at ranges of five thousand miles , Atlas has been striking on an average within two miles of the target . This is less than the length of a jet runway -- well within the circle of destruction . Incidentally , there was an Atlas firing last night . From all reports so far received , its performance conformed to the high standards I have just described . Such performance is a great tribute to American scientists and engineers , who in the past five years have had to telescope time and technology to develop these long-range ballistic missiles , where America had none before . This year , moreover , growing numbers of nuclear powered submarines will enter our active forces , some to be armed with Polaris missiles . These remarkable ships and weapons , ranging the oceans , will be capable of accurate fire on targets virtually anywhere on earth . To meet situations of less than general nuclear war , we continue to maintain our carrier forces , our many service units abroad , our always ready Army strategic forces and Marine Corps divisions , and the civilian components . The continuing modernization of these forces is a costly but necessary process . It is scheduled to go forward at a rate which will steadily add to our strength . The deployment of a portion of these forces beyond our shores , on land and sea , is persuasive demonstration of our determination to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with our allies for collective security . Moreover , I have directed that steps be taken to program on a longer range basis our military assistance to these allies . This is necessary for a sounder collective defense system . Next I refer to our program in space exploration , which is often mistakenly supposed to be an integral part of defense research and development . We note that , first , America has already made great contributions in the past two years to the world's fund of knowledge of astrophysics and space science . These discoveries are of present interest chiefly to the scientific community ; ; but they are important foundation stones for more extensive exploration of outer space for the ultimate benefit of all mankind . Second , our military missile program , going forward so successfully , does not suffer from our present lack of very large rocket engines , which are necessary in distant space exploration . I am assured by experts that the thrust of our present missiles is fully adequate for defense requirements . Third , the United States is pressing forward in the development of large rocket engines to place vehicles of many tons into space for exploration purposes . Fourth , in the meantime , it is necessary to remember that we have only begun to probe the environment immediately surrounding the earth . Using launch systems presently available , we are developing satellites to scout the world's weather ; ; satellite relay stations to facilitate and extend communications over the globe ; ; for navigation aids to give accurate bearings to ships and aircraft ; ; and for perfecting instruments to collect and transmit the data we seek . Fifth , we have just completed a year's experience with our new space law . I believe it deficient in certain particulars . Suggested improvements will be submitted to the Congress shortly . The accomplishment of the many tasks I have alluded to requires the continuous strengthening of the spiritual , intellectual , and economic sinews of American life . The steady purpose of our society is to assure justice , before God , for every individual . We must be ever alert that freedom does not wither through the careless amassing of restrictive controls or the lack of courage to deal boldly with the issues of the day . A year ago , when I met with you , the nation was emerging from an economic downturn , even though the signs of resurgent prosperity were not then sufficiently convincing to the doubtful . Today our surging strength is apparent to everyone . 1960 promises to be the most prosperous year in our history . Yet we continue to be afflicted by nagging disorders . Among current problems that require solutions , participated in by citizens as well as government , are : the need to protect the public interest in situations of prolonged labor-management stalemate ; ; the persistent refusal to come to grips with a critical problem in one sector of American agriculture ; ; the continuing threat of inflation , together with the persisting tendency toward fiscal irresponsibility ; ; in certain instances the denial to some of our citizens of equal protection of the law . The group , upon the issuance of its first press release on December 21 , 1957 , designated itself a `` Committee of Investigation '' . In the course of its inquiry , it took testimony from only seven witnesses . It heard Bang-Jensen twice and his lawyer , Adolf A. Berle , Jr. , once . Its second press release was on January 15 , 1958 , and it recommended that the secret papers be destroyed . It also implied that Paul Bang-Jensen had been irresponsible . On January 18 , Ernest Gross conducted a press conference at the U.N. lasting an hour . Here , he openly attacked Bang-Jensen and referred to his `` aberrant conduct '' . This conference was held despite Stavropoulos' assurance to Adolf Berle , who was leaving the same day for Puerto Rico , that nothing would be done until his return on January 22 , except that the Secretary General would probably order the list destroyed . On January 24 Paul Bang-Jensen , accompanied by Adolf Berle , was met by Dragoslav Protitch and Colonel Frank Begley , former Police Chief of Farmington , Conn. , and now head of U.N. special police . The four , bundled in overcoats , mounted to the wind-swept roof of the U.N. There , Begley lit a fire in a wire basket , and Bang-Jensen dropped four sealed envelopes into the flames . In one of these he said were notes on the identities of the eighty-one refugees . The method of destroying the evidence embarrassed Paul Bang-Jensen . He knew it would be implied that it was done in this way at his insistence . He was right , and Peter Marshall could not help but recall Andrew Cordier's words on the subject , `` Well , it seemed as good a place as any to do the job '' . The Gross group had been formed for the express purpose of advising the Secretary General . Hammarskjold's supposed desire to seek outside legal advice in the guise of Ernest Gross is illusion , at best . Gross's , being `` outside '' the U.N. applied only to a physical state , not an objective one . But by the time the papers were finally disposed of , the group had informed the world of its purpose , its recommendations , and its belief that Paul Bang-Jensen was not of sound mind . Shortly the group would issue its report to the Secretary General , recommending Paul Bang-Jensen's dismissal from the United Nations . The contents of this 195-page document would become known to many before it would become known to the man it was written about . `` Until this Hungarian Committee matter came up , Bang-Jensen was a fine and devoted individual . I had known him for some years , when I was a delegate and before , and this manner had never been his '' . Ernest A. Gross leaned back in his chair and told Peter Marshall how Secretary General Dag Hammarskjold had , on December 4 , 1957 , called him in as a private lawyer to review Bang-Jensen's conduct `` relating to his association with the Special Committee on the problem of Hungary '' . The result was the `` Gross Report '' , prepared by Gross , as chairman , with the assistance of two U.N. Under Secretaries , Constantin Stavropoulos and Philippe De Seynes . `` Yes '' , Gross went on , `` Bang-Jensen was an up-and-coming young man . He had always done well . Never well known , but he had done his work competently . '' Gross had received Marshall courteously and they were discussing the case . `` You know '' , the lawyer said , `` it's difficult to talk like this about a man who can't answer back '' . Gross was behind a clean-top desk , only a manila folder before him . Marshall sat in one of the several leather chairs . Outside the office windows , twenty-four stories above Wall Street , a light rain was falling . `` Mr. Gross , your report says that ' our function is investigative and advisory and does not in any way derogate from or prejudice Mr. Bang-Jensen's rights as a staff member . You know , Bang-Jensen characterized your Committee as having prejudged his case '' . Gross swung his swivel chair . `` Well , how could that have been ? ? I don't consider that he was prejudged . We were given a job and we carried it out , and later , his case was taken up by the Disciplinary Committee . `` We have nothing to hide under a bushel . We did our job , Mr. Stavropoulos and Mr. De Seynes and myself , taking evidence from a number of people '' . `` What did you think about his mental state '' ? ? `` I think our report sums up our finding '' , Gross answered . `` Don't forget , here was a man who had been accusing his colleagues for almost a year of willfully attempting to present an incorrect report . `` This was not merely alleging errors , but was carried out by day-after-day allegations in memos , written charges of serious consequence . `` This is a distressing thing . Supposing you or I were being accused in this manner , and yet we were doing our level best to carry on our work . No organization can carry on like that . `` I've been in government and I can tell some pretty hairy stories about personnel difficulties , so I know what a problem he was '' . `` What I'd like you to comment on is the criticism leveled at your Committee '' . `` What do you mean '' ? ? `` For instance , regarding the fact that the Gross Committee issued two interim announcements to the press during its investigation . You know Bang-Jensen was told the Committee was ' to convey its views , suggestions and recommendations to the Secretary General . In his own words , Bang-Jensen ' took it for granted that the Group would report to the Secretary General privately and not in public . He claimed that the release of the preliminary findings was ' prejudicial to his position ' '' . Gross bristled . For an instant he glared speechless at Marshall . `` Listen '' , he said . `` I thought the entire report was going to be confidential from beginning to end . But you know Bang-Jensen launched an active campaign against us in the press . It was getting so that we , the Committee , were being tried . You can find it in the papers '' . `` Well , as a matter of fact , I've looked through back-issue files of New York papers for December , 1957 , and haven't found a great deal '' -- Gross shot another look at Marshall . `` It wasn't necessarily all here in New York . Don't forget the foreign press '' . `` Then what about the second interim public announcement ? ? This cited Bang-Jensen's ' aberrant conduct ' '' . `` The reason for that report was to settle the matter of the list . As far as I'm concerned , it was a separate matter from the general Committee study of Bang-Jensen's conduct . The January fifteen report recommended that Bang-Jensen be instructed to burn the list -- the papers -- in the presence of a U.N. Security Officer '' . `` How about your press conference three days later -- what was the reason for that ? ? Bang-Jensen said you told correspondents that you had checked in advance to make sure the term ' aberrant conduct ' was not libelous . He claimed you made other slanderous allegations '' . Gross paused and repeated himself . `` The entire object of the press conference was to clarify the problem of the list , since many in the press were querying the U.N. about it . What was the list ? ? I don't know . Bang-Jensen never explained what the documents or papers were that he had in his possession . `` It was foolish of him to keep them , whatever they were . He could have been blackmailed , or his family might have been threatened . Of course the matter caught the public's attention . We attempted to conclude this , and did so by having the papers burned . Hammarskjold didn't like the way it was carried out . It was a sort of Gotterdammerung affair . Hammarskjold believes the U.N. is an organization that settles matters in a procedural way . '' Peter Marshall reflected . If Hammarskjold had not wanted the list disposed of in this manner , and if Bang-Jensen had not wanted it -- who had ordered it ? ? `` Mr. Gross , concerning the formation of your Committee , there's the fact that you have been a legal adviser to the U.N. in the past ; ; as I understand it , Mr. Hammarskjold wanted outside advice . Could you comment on that '' ? ? `` I've served as a counsel for the U.N. for some years , specializing particularly in real estate matters or other problems that the regular U.N. legal staff might not be equipped to handle . Mr. Stavropoulos is the U.N. legal chief and a very good man , but he is not fully versed on some technical points of American law '' . `` What did you think about Bang-Jensen's contention of errors and omissions in the Hungarian report '' ? ? Marshall asked . `` Those '' ! ! Gross answered . `` Why , Mick Shann went over and over the report with Alsing Andersen , trying to check them out . Even after the incident between Bang-Jensen and Shann in the Delegates' Lounge and this was not the way the Chicago Tribune presented it '' . Gross reached in his desk and pulled out two newspaper clippings . One was an article on the U.N. by Alice Widener from the Cincinnati Enquirer . The other was by Chesly Manley in the Chicago Daily Tribune . Gross pointed to the Manley story . `` I know Ches , he's a friend of mine . He probably didn't mean to write it this way , or maybe he did . There wasn't any ' violent argument ' between Bang-Jensen and Shann , as the Tribune puts it . That implies that Shann was on the enemy side . You see what I mean ? ? How it's phrased there -- the word violent . `` The case was that Bang-Jensen came up to Shann claiming he had found further errors in the report . ' I've found errors and I want you to look them over . So once again Shann had to argue with him about this . But it wasn't a violent discussion . And after all this , Shann went over all that Bang-Jensen had brought up '' . ( Shann's own report , Peter Marshall reflected , describes the encounter as `` immoderate '' . Bang-Jensen was in `` hysterical condition '' . ) Gross stopped briefly , then went on . `` Shann was responsible for the report . He has felt terrible about all this . It was a good report , he did all he could to make it a good report . When I speak of how Shann felt , I know well . Don't forget , I am an old member of the club , a former delegate . I think you are being unfair to take these things up now . `` You know , this hits in many areas . It appeals to those who were frustrated in the outcome of the Hungarian situation . Don't forget , the U.N. did no more than the United States did . It takes a great deal of sophisticated thought to get the impact of this fact '' . Chapter 22 from the home of his friend , Henrik Kauffmann , in Washington , D.C. , Paul Bang-Jensen sent a telegram dated December 9 , 1957 , to Ernest Gross . It said in part : `` the matters to be considered are obviously of a grave character , and I therefore respectfully request that the hearing be postponed for two weeks in order that I might make adequate preparation '' . Ernest Gross replied the next day , putting the suspended diplomat's fears to rest . `` This reveals some misunderstanding on your part . The group conducting the review is not holding formal hearings . It wished to pursue , in the course of this review , questions arising from the body of material already in its possession . '' It sounded like a fair enough invitation , Peter Marshall reflected , and Bang-Jensen must have thought so too , because on the thirteenth , he met the group of three on the thirty-sixth floor of the U.N. . There , Ernest Gross further assured him : `` We were requested by the Secretary General , as I understand it , to discuss with you such matters as appear to us to be relevant , and we are not of course either a formal group or a committee in the sense of being guided by any rules or regulations of the Secretariat . The only rules which I think we shall follow will be those of common sense , justice , and fairness '' . Peter Marshall noted that Bang-Jensen had later referred to his two interviews with the Gross group as `` unfortunate experiences '' , and after his second meeting on the sixteenth the Dane refused to attend further hearings without legal counsel . Marshall pondered the reason for this , and pondered too the replacement of one member of the three-man group . J. A. C. Robertson , after serving Gross one week , left for England . Fortunately the hole was found at last and plugged . Another week passed and even the missionaries were enjoying the voyage . The sickness was gone and , after all , the two young couples were on their honeymoon . The only lasting difficulty was the food . In spite of Pickering Dodge's explicit instructions regarding variation of meals , the food did not seem the same as at home . `` Everything tasted differently from what it does on land and those things I was most fond of at home , I loathed the most here '' , Ann noted . At last they concluded that the heavy , full feeling in their stomachs was due to lack of exercise . Walking was the remedy , they decided , but a deck full of chicken coops and pigpens was hardly suitable . Skipping was the alternative . A rope was found and , like children in school , the missionaries skipped for hours at a time . Finally , tiring of so monotonous a form of exercise , they decided to dance instead . It was much more fun , reminding the girls of their old carefree days in the Hasseltine frolics room at Bradford . The weather turned warmer and with it came better appetites , although Harriet was still a little off-color . She could not face coffee or tea without milk , and was always craving types of food that were not available aboard a sailing ship . By now she was sure she was going to have a baby , deciding it would be born in India or Burma that November . She was more excited than frightened at the prospect of having her first child in a foreign land . The crew of the Caravan never failed to amaze Ann , who during her stay in Salem must frequently have overheard strong sailorly language . She wrote in her journal , `` I have not heard the least profane language since I have been on board the vessel . This is very uncommon '' . She was now enjoying the voyage very much . Even the first wave of homesickness had passed , although there were moments when Captain Heard pointed out on his compass the direction of Bradford that she felt a little twinge at her heart . As for Adoniram , she found him to be `` the kindest '' of husbands . On Sundays , with the permission of Captain Heard , who usually attended with two of his officers , services were held in the double cabin . Sometimes a ship would be sighted and the Caravan pass so close that people could easily be seen on the distant deck . Captain Heard did not communicate with any strange vessels because of the possibility of war between the United States and Britain . As warmer temperatures were encountered Ann and Harriet were introduced to the pleasures of bathing daily in salt water . When May came the Caravan had already crossed the Equator . They were sailing round the Cape of Good Hope ; ; the weather had turned wet and cold . At this time Harriet wrote in a letter which after their finally landing in India was sent to her mother : `` I care not how soon we reach Calcutta , and are placed in a still room , with a bowl of milk and a loaf of Indian bread . I can hardly think of this simple fare without exclaiming , oh , what a luxury . I have been so weary of the excessive rocking of the vessel , and the almost intolerable smell after the rain , that I have done little more than lounge on the bed for several days . But I have been blest with excellent spirits , and to-day have been running about the deck , and dancing in our room for exercise , as well as ever '' . While studying at the seminary in Andover , Adoniram had been working on a New Testament translation from the original Greek . He had brought it along to continue during the voyage . There was one particular word that troubled his conscience . This was the Greek word most often translated as `` baptism '' . Born a Congregationalist , he had been baptized as a tiny baby in the usual manner by having a few drops of water sprinkled on his head , yet nowhere in the whole of the New Testament could he find a description of anybody being baptized by sprinkling . John the Baptist used total immersion in the River Jordan for believers ; ; even Christ was baptized by this method . The more Adoniram looked at the Greek word for baptism , the more unhappy he became over its true meaning . As was only natural he confided his searchings to Ann , conceding ruefully that it certainly looked as if their own Congregationalists were wrong and the Baptists right . Ann was very troubled . By this time she had learned that it was futile to argue with her young husband , yet the uncomfortable fact remained : the American Congregationalists were sending them as missionaries to the Far East and paying their salaries . What would happen if Adoniram `` changed horses in midstream '' ? ? Baptists and Congregationalists in New England were on friendly terms . How embarrassing it would be if the newly appointed Congregationalist missionaries should suddenly switch their own beliefs in order to embrace Baptist teachings ! ! `` If you become a Baptist , I will not '' , Ann informed her husband , but sweeping her threat aside Adoniram continued to search for an answer to the personal dilemma in which he found himself . By early June they were a hundred miles off the coast of Ceylon , by which time all four missionaries were hardened seafarers . Even Harriet could boldly write , `` I know not how it is ; ; but I hear the thunder roll ; ; see the lightning flash ; ; and the waves threatening to swallow up the vessel ; ; and yet remain unmoved '' . Ann thrilled to the sight of a delicate butterfly and two strange tropical birds . Land was near , and on June 12 , one hundred and fourteen days after leaving America , they actually saw , twenty miles away , the coast of Orissa . Captain Heard gave orders for the ship to be anchored in the Bay of Bengal until he could obtain the services of a reputable pilot to steer her through the shallow waters . Sometimes ships waited for days for such a man , but Captain Heard was lucky . Next day a ship arrived with an English pilot , his leadsman , an English youth , and the first Hindu the Judsons and Newells had ever seen . A little man with a `` a dark copper color '' skin , he was wearing `` calico trousers and a white cotton short gown '' . Ann was plainly disappointed in his appearance . `` He looks as feminine as you can imagine '' , she decided . The pilot possessed excellent skill at his calling ; ; all day long the Caravan slowly made her way through the difficult passages . Alas , to Ann's consternation , his language while thus employed left much to be desired . He swore so loudly at the top of his voice , that she didn't get any sleep all the next night . Next morning the Caravan was out of the treacherous Bay . Relieved of the major part of his responsibility for the safety of the ship , the pilot's oaths became fewer . Slowly she moved up the Hooghli River , a mouth of the mighty Ganges , toward Calcutta . Ann was entranced with the view , as were her husband and friends . Running across the deck , which was empty now that the livestock had been killed and eaten , they sniffed the spice-laden breezes that came from the shore , each pointing out new and exciting wonders to the other . Out came the journal and in it went Ann's own description of the scene : `` On each side of the Hoogli , where we are now sailing , are the Hindoo cottages , as thick together as the houses in our seaports . They are very small , and in the form of haystacks , without either chimney or windows . They are situated in the midst of trees , which hang over them , and appear truly romantick . The grass and fields of rice are perfectly green , and herds of cattle are everywhere feeding on the banks of the river , and the natives are scattered about differently employed . Some are fishing , some driving the team , and many are sitting indolently on the banks of the river . The pagodas we have passed are much larger than the houses '' . Harriet was just as delighted . Where were the hardships she had expected ? ? She was certain now that it would be no harder to bear her child here in such pleasant surroundings than at home in the big white house in Haverhill . With childlike innocence she wrote of the Indians as `` walking with fruit and umbrellas in their hands , with the tawny children around them . This is the most delightful trial I have ever had '' , she decided . The Indians who came aboard ship to collect the mail also interested her greatly , even if she was suitably shocked , according to the customs of the society in which she had been reared , to find them `` naked , except a piece of cotton cloth wrapped around their middle '' . At last they saw Calcutta , largest city of Bengal and the Caravan's destination . Founded August 24 , 1690 by Job Charnock of the East India Company , and commonly called `` The City of Palaces '' , it seemed a vast and elegant place to Ann Hasseltine Judson . Solid brick buildings painted dazzling white , large domes and tall , picturesque palms stretched as far as the eye could see , while the wharves and harbor were filled with tall-masted sailing ships . The noise stunned her . Crowds flocked through the waterfront streets chattering loudly in their strange-sounding Bengali tongue . Harriet's mouth watered with anticipation when after months of dreaming she sat down at last to her much-craved milk and fresh bread . Ann , pleased to see her friend happy , was intrigued by the new fruits a friend of Captain Heard had sent on board for their enjoyment . Cautiously she sampled her first pineapple and another fruit whose taste she likened to that of `` a rich pear '' . Though she did not then know its name , this strange new fruit was a banana . Six The first act of Adoniram and Samuel on reaching Calcutta was to report at the police station , a necessity when landing in East India Company territory . On the way they tried to discover all they could about Burma , and they were disturbed to find that Michael Symes's book had not presented an altogether true picture . He had failed to realize that the Burmese were not really treating him as the important visitor he considered himself . They were in fact quietly laughing at him , for their King wished to have nothing to do with the Western world . When Captain John Gibault of Salem had visited Burma in 1793 his ship , the Astra , had been promptly commandeered and taken by her captors up the Irrawaddy River . Although after much trouble he did manage to get it back , he discovered there was no trade to be had . All Captain Gibault took back to Salem were a few items for the town's East India Museum . A year later another Salem ship returned from Burma with a cargo of gum lacquer which nobody wanted to buy . After that Salem ships decided to bypass unfriendly Burma . The Burmese appeared to have little knowledge of British power or any idea of trade . They despised foreigners . Cruel Burmese governors could , on the slightest whim , take a man's life . As for missionaries , even if they succeeded in getting into the country they probably would not be allowed to preach the Christian faith to the Burmans . Unspeakable tortures or even execution might well be their fate . `` Go back to America or any other place '' , well-meaning friends of Captain Heard advised them , `` but put thoughts of going to Burma out of your heads '' . Somewhat daunted , the two American missionaries reached the police station where they were questioned by a most unfriendly clerk . When he discovered they had received from the Company's Court of Directors no permission to live in India , coupled with the fact that they were Americans who had been sent to Asia to convert `` the heathen '' , he became more belligerent than ever . They explained that they desired only to stop in India until a ship traveling on to Burma could be found . She describes , first , the imaginary reaction of a foreigner puzzled by this `` unseasonable exultation '' ; ; he is answered by a confused , honest Englishman . The reasons for the Whig joy on this occasion are found to be their expectation of regaining control of the government , their delight at the prospect of a new war , their hopes of having the Tories hanged , and so on . As for the author of the Englishman , Mrs. Manley sarcastically deplores that the sole defense of the Protestant cause should be left to `` Ridpath , Dick Steele , and their Associates , with the Apostles of Young Man's Coffee-House '' . Another controversy typical of the war between the Englishman and the Examiner centered on Robert ( later Viscount ) Molesworth , a Whig leader in Ireland and a member of the Irish Privy Council . On December 21 , the day that the Irish House of Commons petitioned for removal of Sir Constantine Phipps , their Tory Lord Chancellor , Molesworth reportedly made this remark on the defense of Phipps by Convocation : `` They that have turned the world upside down , are come hither also '' . Upon complaints from the Lower House of Convocation to the House of Lords , he was removed from the Privy Council , his remark having been represented as a blasphemous affront to the clergy . Steele , who had earlier praised Molesworth in Tatler No. 189 , now defended him in Englishman No. 46 , depicting his removal as a setback to the Constitution . On the other hand , Molesworth was naturally assailed in the Tory press . Swift , in the Dublin edition of A Preface to the Bishop of Sarum's Introduction , indicated his feelings by including Molesworth , along with Toland , Tindal , and Collins , in the group of those who , like Burnet , are engaged in attacking all Convocations of the clergy . In the same way he coupled Molesworth and Wharton in a letter to Archbishop King , and he had earlier described him as `` the worst of them '' in some `` Observations '' on the Irish Privy Council submitted to Oxford . A month later , in The Publick Spirit Of The Whigs , he used Steele's defense of Molesworth as evidence of his disrespect for the clergy , calling Steele's position an affront to the `` whole Convocation of Ireland '' . On this issue , then , as on so many in these months , Steele and Swift took rigidly opposed points of view . In the early months of 1714 , the battle between Swift and Steele over the issue of the Succession entered its major phase . The preliminaries ended with the publication of Steele's Crisis on January 19 , and from that point on the fight proceeded at a rapid pace . In answer to The Crisis , Swift produced The Publick Spirit Of The Whigs , his most extensive and bitter attack on his old friend . By this time , as we shall see , the Tories were already planning to `` punish '' Steele for his political writing by expelling him from the House of Commons . Despite his defense of himself in the final paper of the Englishman and in his speech before the House , their efforts were successful . Steele lost his seat in Parliament , and his personal quarrel with Swift , by now a public issue , thus reached its climax . Of all the Whig tracts written in support of the Succession , The Crisis is perhaps the most significant . Certainly it is the most pretentious and elaborate . Hanoverian agents assisted in promoting circulation , said to have reached 40,000 , and if one may judge by the reaction of Swift and other government writers , the work must have had considerable impact . Steele's main business here is to arouse public opinion to the immediate danger of a Stuart Restoration . To this end , the first and longest section of the tract cites all the laws enacted since the Revolution to defend England against the `` Arbitrary Power of a Popish Prince '' . In his comment on these laws Steele sounds all the usual notes of current Whig propaganda , ranging from a criticism of the Tory peace to an attack on the dismissal of Marlborough ; ; but his principal theme is that the intrigues of the Tories , `` our Popish or Jacobite Party '' , pose an immediate threat to Church and State . Like Burnet , he deplores the indifference of the people in the face of the crisis . Treasonable books striking at the Hanoverian Succession , he complains , are allowed to pass unnoticed . In this connection , Swift , too , is drawn in for attack : `` The Author of The Conduct Of The Allies has dared to drop Insinuations about altering the Succession '' . In his effort to stir the public from its lethargy , Steele goes so far as to list Catholic atrocities of the sort to be expected in the event of a Stuart Restoration , and , with rousing rhetoric , he asserts that the only preservation from these `` Terrours '' is to be found in the laws he has so tediously cited . `` It is no time '' , he writes , `` to talk with Hints and Innuendos , but openly and honestly to profess our Sentiments before our Enemies have compleated and put their Designs in Execution against us '' . Steele apparently professed his sentiments in this book too openly and honestly for his own good , since the government was soon to use it as evidence against him in his trial before the House . In the final issues of the Englishman , which ended just as the new session of Parliament began , he provided his enemies with still more ammunition . For example , No. 56 printed the patent giving the Electoral Prince the title of Duke of Cambridge . In a few months the Duke was to be the center of a controversy of some significance on the touchy question of the Protestant Succession . At the order of the Dowager Electress , the Hanoverian agents , supported by the Whig leaders , demanded that a writ of summons be issued which would call the Duke to England to sit in Parliament , thus further insuring the Succession by establishing a Hanoverian Prince in England before the Queen's death . Anne was furious , and Bolingbroke advised that the request be refused . Oxford , realizing that the law required the issuance of the writ , took the opposite view , for which the Queen never forgave him . Accordingly the request was granted , but the Elector himself , who had not been consulted by his mother , rejected the proposal and recalled his agent Schutz , whose impolitic handling of the affair had caused the Hanoverian interest to suffer and had made Oxford's dismissal more likely than ever . Steele in this paper is indicating his sympathy for such a plan . A few days after this Englishman appeared , Defoe reported to Oxford that Steele was expected to move in Parliament that the Duke be called over ; ; Defoe then commented , `` If they Could Draw that young Gentleman into Their Measures They would show themselves quickly , for they are not asham'd to Say They want only a head to Make a beginning '' . The final issue of the Englishman , No. 57 for February 15 , ran to some length and was printed as a separate pamphlet , entitled The Englishman : Being the Close of the Paper So-called . Steele's purpose is to present a general defense of his political writing and a resume of the themes which had occupied him in the Englishman ; ; but there is much here also which bears directly on his personal quarrel with Swift . Thus he complains , with considerable justice , that the Tory writers have resorted to libel instead of answering his arguments . His birth , education , and fortune , he says , have all been ridiculed simply because he has spoken with the freedom of an Englishman , and he assures the reader that `` whoever talks with me , is speaking to a Gentleman born '' . As notable examples of this abuse , he quotes passages from the Examiner , `` that Destroyer of all things '' , and The Character of Richard Steele , which he here attributes to Swift . Though put in rather maudlin terms , Steele's defense of himself has a reasonable basis . His point is simply that the Tories have showered him with personal satire , despite the fact that as a private subject he has a right to speak on political matters without affronting the prerogative of the Sovereign . He claims , too , that his political convictions are simply those which are called `` Revolution Principles '' and which are accepted by moderate men in both parties . The final section of this pamphlet is of special interest in a consideration of Steele's relations with Swift . It purports to be a letter from Steele to a friend at court , who , in Miss Blanchard's opinion , could only be meant as Swift . Steele first answers briefly the charges which his `` dear old Friend '' has made about his pamphlet on Dunkirk and his Crisis . Then he launches into an attack on the Tory ministers , whom he calls the `` New Converts '' ; ; by this term he means to ridicule their professions of acting in the interest of the Church despite their own education and manner of life -- a gibe , in other words , at the `` Presbyterianism '' in Harley's family and at Bolingbroke's reputed impiety . The Tory leaders , he insinuates , are cynically using the Church as a political `` By-word '' to increase party friction and keep themselves in power . This is the principal point made in this final section of Englishman No. 57 , and it caps Steele's efforts in his other writing of these months to counteract the notion of the Tories as a `` Church Party '' supported by the body of the clergy . Next , Steele turns his attention to the `` Courtier '' he is addressing . He explains that there are sometimes honorable courtiers , but that too often a man who succeeds at court does not hesitate to sacrifice his Sovereign and nation to his own avarice and ambition . Such , he implies , is the case with his friend , who is not really a new convert himself but merely a favorer of new converts . If `` Jack the Courtier '' is really to be taken as Swift , the following remark is obviously Steele's comment on Swift's change of parties and its effect on their friendship : `` I assure you , dear Jack , when I first found out such an Allay in you , as makes you of so malleable a Constitution , that you may be worked into any Form an Artificer pleases , I foresaw I should not enjoy your Favour much longer '' . He closes his `` letter '' by demanding that Dunkirk be demolished , that the Pretender be forced to move farther away from the coast of England , and that the Queen and the House of Hanover come to a better understanding . The last point was soon to be included in the `` seditious '' remarks used against him in Parliament . The Examiner , during Steele's trial a month later , printed an answer from the `` Courtier '' addressed to `` R. S. '' at Button's coffee-house . He reviews Steele's entrance into politics and finds that his present difficulties are due to his habit of attributing to his own abilities and talents achievements which more properly should be credited to the indulgence of his friends . Once more , in other words , Steele is said to be indebted to Swift for his `` wit '' ; ; this was the form in which their private feud most often appeared in the Tory press , especially the Examiner . In The Publick Spirit of the Whigs , it may be noted , Swift himself contemptuously dismissed Steele's reference to his friend at court : `` I suppose by the Style of old Friend , and the like , it must be some Body there of his own Level ; ; among whom , his Party have indeed more Friends than I could wish '' . On February 16 , Steele took his seat in Parliament . By now he was undergoing a fresh torrent of abuse from Tory papers and pamphlets , and action was being taken to effect his punishment by expulsion from Parliament . On the very day that the parliamentary session began , another `` Infamous Libel '' appeared , entitled A Letter From The Facetious Dr. Andrew Tripe , At Bath , To The Venerable Nestor Ironside . It is filled with the usual personal abuse of Steele , especially of his physical appearance ; ; in the opening paragraph , too , Steele is accused of extreme egotism , of giving `` himself the preference to all the learned , his contemporaries , from Dr. Swift himself , even down to Poet Cr--spe of the Customhouse '' . When Harold Arlen returned to California in the winter of 1944 , it was to take up again a collaboration with Johnny Mercer , begun some years before . The film they did after his return was an inconsequential bit of nothing titled Out Of This World , a satire on the Sinatra bobby-soxer craze . The twist lay in using Bing Crosby's voice on the sound track while leading man Eddie Bracken mouthed the words . If nothing else , at least two good songs came out of the project , `` Out Of This World '' and `` June Comes Around Every Year '' . Though they would produce some very memorable and lasting songs , Arlen and Mercer were not given strong material to work on . Their first collaboration came close . Early in 1941 they were assigned to a script titled Hot Nocturne . It purported to be a reasonably serious attempt at a treatment of jazz musicians , their aims , their problems -- the tug-of-war between the `` pure '' and the `` commercial '' -- and seemed a promising vehicle , for the two men shared a common interest in jazz . Johnny Mercer practically grew up with the sound of jazz and the blues in his ears . He was born in Savannah , Georgia , in 1909 . His father , George A. Mercer , was descended from an honored Southern family that could trace its ancestry back to one Hugh Mercer , who had emigrated from Scotland in 1747 . The lyricist's father was a lawyer who had branched out into real estate . His second wife , Lillian , was the mother of John H. Mercer . By the age of six young Johnny indicated that he had the call . One day he followed the Irish Jasper Greens , the town band , to a picnic and spent the entire day listening , while his family spent the day looking . The disappearance caused his family to assign a full-time maid to keeping an eye on the boy . But one afternoon Mrs. Mercer met her ; ; both were obviously on the way to the Mercer home . The mother inquired , `` Where's Johnny , and why did you leave him '' ? ? `` There was nothing else I could do '' , the maid answered , satisfied with a rather vague explanation . But Mrs. Mercer demanded more . The maid then told her , `` Because he fired me '' . With her son evidencing so strong a musical bent his mother could do little else but get him started on the study of music -- though she waited until he was ten -- beginning with the piano and following that with the trumpet . Young Mercer showed a remarkable lack of aptitude for both instruments . Still , he did like music making and even sang in the chapel choir of the Woodberry Forest School , near Orange , Virginia , where he sounded fine but did not matriculate too well . When he was fifteen John H. Mercer turned out his first song , a jazzy little thing he called `` Sister Susie , Strut Your Stuff '' . If his scholarship and formal musicianship were not all they might have been , Mercer demonstrated at an early age that he was gifted with a remarkable ear for rhythm and dialect . From his playmates in Savannah , Mercer had picked up , along with a soft Southern dialect , traces also of the Gullah dialects of Africa . Such speech differences made him acutely aware of the richness and expressivness of language . During the summers , while he was still in school , Mercer worked for his father's firm as a messenger boy . It generally took well into the autumn for the firm to recover from the summer's help . `` We'd give him things to deliver , letters , checks , deeds and things like that '' , remembers his half-brother Walter , still in the real estate business in Savannah , `` and learn days later that he'd absent-mindedly stuffed them into his pocket . There they stayed '' . This rather detached attitude toward life's encumbrances has seemed to be the dominant trait in Mercer's personality ever since . It is , however , a disarming disguise , or perhaps a shield , for not only has Mercer proved himself to be one of the few great lyricists over the years , but also one who can function remarkably under pressure . He has also enjoyed a successful career as an entertainer ( his records have sold in the millions ) and is a sharp businessman . He has also an extraordinary conscience . In 1927 his father's business collapsed , and , rather than go bankrupt , Mercer senior turned his firm over to a bank for liquidation . He died before he could completely pay off his debts . Some years later the bank handling the Mercer liquidation received a check for $300,000 , enough to clear up the debt . The check had been mailed from Chicago , the envelope bore no return address , and the check was not signed . `` That's Johnny '' , sighed the bank president , `` the best-hearted boy in the world , but absent-minded '' . But Mercer's explanation was simple : `` I made out the check and carried it around a few days unsigned -- in case I lost it '' . When he remembered that he might have not signed the check , Mercer made out another for the same amount , instructing the bank to destroy the other -- especially if he had happened to have absent-mindedly signed both of them . When the family business failed , Mercer left school and on his mother's urging -- for she hoped that he would become an actor -- he joined a local little theater group . When the troupe traveled to New York to participate in a one-act-play competition -- and won -- Mercer , instead of returning with the rest of the company in triumph , remained in New York . He had talked one other member of the group to stay with him , but that friend had tired of not eating regularly and returned to Savannah . But Mercer hung on , living , after a fashion , in a Greenwich Village fourth-flight walk-up . `` The place had no sink or washbasin , only a bathtub '' , his mother discovered when she visited him . `` Johnny insisted on cooking a chicken dinner in my honor -- he's always been a good cook -- and I'll never forget him cleaning the chicken in the tub '' . A story , no doubt apocryphal , for Mercer himself denies it , has him sporting a monacle in those Village days . Though merely clear glass , it was a distinctive trade mark for an aspiring actor who hoped to imprint himself upon the memories of producers . One day in a bar , so the legend goes , someone put a beer stein with too much force on the monacle and broke it . The innocent malfeasant , filled with that supreme sense of honor found in bars , insisted upon replacing the destroyed monacle -- and did , over the protests of the former owner -- with a square monacle . Mercer is supposed to have refused it with , `` Anyone who wears a square monacle must be affected '' ! ! Everett Miller , then assistant director for the Garrick Gaieties , a Theatre Guild production , needed a lyricist for a song he had written ; ; he just happened not to need any actor at the moment , however . For him Mercer produced the lyric to `` Out Of Breath Scared To Death Of You '' , introduced in that most successful of all the Gaieties , by Sterling Holloway . This 1930 edition also had songs in it by Vernon Duke and Ira Gershwin , by E. Y. Harburg and Duke , and by Harry Myers . Entrance into such stellar song writing company encouraged the burgeoning song writer to take a wife , Elizabeth Meehan , a dancer in the Gaieties . The Mercers took up residence in Brooklyn , and Mercer found a regular job in Wall Street `` misplacing stocks and bonds '' . When he heard that Paul Whiteman was looking for singers to replace the Rhythm Boys , Mercer applied and got the job , `` not for my voice , I'm sure , but because I could write songs and material generally '' . While with the Whiteman band Mercer met Jerry Arlen . He had yet to meet Harold Arlen , for although they had `` collaborated '' on `` Satan's Li'l Lamb '' , Mercer and Harburg had worked from a lead sheet the composer had furnished them . The lyric , Mercer remembers , was tailored to fit the unusual melody . Mercer's Whiteman association brought him into contact with Hoagy Carmichael , whose `` Snowball '' Mercer relyriced as `` Lazybones '' , in which form it became a hit and marked the real beginning of Mercer's song-writing career . After leaving Whiteman , Mercer joined the Benny Goodman band as a vocalist . With the help of Ziggy Elman , also in the band , he transformed a traditional Jewish melody into a popular song , `` And The Angels Sing '' . The countrywide success of `` Lazybones '' and `` And The Angels Sing '' could only lead to Hollywood , where , besides Harold Arlen , Mercer collaborated with Harry Warren , Jimmy Van Heusen , Richard Whiting , Walter Donaldson , Jerome Kern , and Arthur Schwartz . Mercer has also written both music and lyrics for several songs . He may be the only song writer ever to have collaborated with a secretary of the U. S. Treasury ; ; he collaborated on a song with William Hartman Woodin , who was Secretary of the Treasury , 1932-33 . When Johnny Mercer and Harold Arlen began their collaboration in 1940 , Mercer , like Arlen , had several substantial film songs to his credit , among them `` Hooray For Hollywood '' , `` Ride , Tenderfoot , Ride '' , `` Have You Got Any Castles , Baby ? ? '' , and `` Too Marvelous For Words '' ( all with Richard Whiting ) ; ; with Harry Warren he did `` The Girl Friend Of The Whirling Dervish '' , `` Jeepers Creepers '' , and `` You Must Have Been A Beautiful Baby '' . Mercer's lyrics are characterized by an unerring ear for rhythmic nuances , a puckish sense of humor expressed in language with a colloquial flair . Though versatile and capable of turning out a ballad lyric with the best of them , Mercer's forte is a highly polished quasi-folk wit . His casual , dreamlike working methods , often as not in absentia , were an abrupt change from Harburg's , so that Arlen had to adjust again to another approach to collaboration . There were times that he worked with both lyricists simultaneously . Speaking of his work with Johnny Mercer , Arlen says , `` Our working habits were strange . After we got a script and the spots for the songs were blocked out , we'd get together for an hour or so every day . While Johnny made himself comfortable on the couch , I'd play the tunes for him . He has a wonderfully retentive memory . After I would finish playing the songs , he'd just go away without a comment . I wouldn't hear from him for a couple of weeks , then he'd come around with the completed lyric '' . Arlen is one of the few ( possibly the only ) composer Mercer has been able to work with so closely , for they held their meetings in Arlen's study . `` Some guys bothered me '' , Mercer has said . `` I couldn't write with them in the same room with me , but I could with Harold . He is probably our most original composer ; ; he often uses very odd rhythms , which makes it difficult , and challenging , for the lyric writer '' . While Arlen and Mercer collaborated on Hot Nocturne , Mercer worked also with Arthur Schwartz on another film , Navy Blues . Arlen , too , worked on other projects at the same time with old friend Ted Koehler . Besides doing a single song , `` When The Sun Comes Out '' , they worked on the ambitious American-Negro Suite , for voices and piano , as well as songs for films . The American-Negro Suite is in a sense an extension of the Cotton Club songs in that it is a collection of Negro songs , not for a night club , but for the concert stage . The work had its beginning in 1938 with an eight-bar musical strain to which Koehler set the words `` There'll be no more work ; ; there'll be no more worry '' , matching the spiritual feeling of the jot . This grew into the song `` Big Time Comin' '' . By September 1940 the Suite had developed into a collection of six songs , `` four spirituals , a dream , and a lullaby '' . The Negro composer Hall Johnson studied the American-Negro Suite and said of it , `` Of all the many songs written by white composers and employing what claims to be a Negroid idiom in both words and music , these six songs by Harold Arlen and Ted Koehler easily stand far out above the rest . Thoroughly modern in treatment , they are at the same time , full of simple sincerity which invariably characterizes genuine Negro folk-music and are by no means to be confused with the average ' Broadway Spirituals ' which depend for their racial flavor upon sundry allusions to the ' Amen Corner ' , ' judgement Day , ' Gabriel's Horn , and a frustrated devil -- with a few random hallelujahs thrown in for good measure . I feel obliged to describe this cubbyhole . It had a single porcelain stall and but one cabinet for the chairing of the bards . It was here that the terror-stricken Dennis Moon played an unrehearsed role during the children's party . A much larger room , adjacent to the lavatory , served as a passageway to and from the skimpy toilet . That unused room was large enough for -- well , say an elephant could get into it and , as a matter of fact , an elephant did . Something occurred on the morning of the children's party which may illustrate the kind of trouble our restricted toilet facilities caused us . It so happened that sports writer Arthur Robinson got out of the hospital that morning after promising his doctor that he be back in an hour or two to continue his convalescence . Arthur Robinson traveled with the baseball clubs as staff correspondent for the American . He was ghost writer for Babe Ruth , whose main talent for literary composition was the signing of his autograph . Robbie was a war veteran with battle-shattered knees . He arrived on crutches at the Newspaper Club with one of his great pals , Oliver Herford , artist , author , and foe of stupidity . Mr. Herford's appearance was that of a frustrated gnome . He seemed timid ( at first , ) wore nose glasses from which a black ribbon dangled , and was no bigger than a jockey . Robinson asked Herford to escort him to the club's lavatory before they sat down for a highball and a game of cards . In the jakes , after Robbie and his crutches were properly stowed , Mr. Herford went to the adjoining facility . He had barely assumed his stance there when a fat fellow charged through the doorway . Without any regard for rest-room protocol , the hulking stranger almost knocked Herford off his pins . The artist-author said nothing , but stood to one side . He waited a long time . Nothing was said , nothing accomplished . The unrelieved stranger eventually turned away from the place of his -- shall we dare say his Waterloo ? ? -- to go to the door . Mr. Herford touched the fat man's arm . `` Pardon me , sir . May I say that you have just demonstrated the truth of an old proverb -- the younger Pliny's , if memory serves me -- which , translated freely from the archaic Latin , says , ' The more haste , the less peed ' '' . Governor Alfred E. Smith was the official host at the children's party . United States Senator Royal S. Copeland was wearing the robes of Santa Claus and a great white beard ; ; the Honorable Robert Wagner , Sr. , at that time a justice of the New York Supreme Court , was on the reception committee . I was in charge of the arrangements -- which were soon enough disarranged . I had had difficulties from the very first day . When , in my enthusiasm , I proposed the party , my city editor ( who disliked the club and many of its members ) tried to block my participation in the gala event . Even earlier than that he had resented the fact that I had been chosen to edit the club's Reporter . City editor Victor Watson of the New York American was a man of brooding suspicions and mysterious shifts of mood . Mr. Hearst's telegraphic code word for Victor Watson was `` fatboy '' . The staff saw in him the qualities of a Don Cossack , hence , as mentioned before , his nickname `` the Hetman '' . The Hetman's physical aspects were not those of a savage rider of the steppes . Indeed , he looked more like a well-fleshed lay brother of the Hospice of St. Bernard . Nor were his manners barbaric . He had a purring voice and poker player's immobility of features which somehow conveyed the feeling that he knew where all the bodies were buried . He was the son of a Scottish father and an American Jewish mother , long widowed , with whom he lived in a comfortable home in Flushing . He had worked in the newspaper business since he was nineteen years old , always for the Hearst service . From the very first he regarded himself as Mr. Hearst's disciple , defender , and afterward his prime minister , self-ordained . It was said that the Hetman plotted to take over the entire Hearst newspaper empire one day by means of various coups : the destruction of editors who tried to halt his course , the unfrocking of publishers whose mistakes of judgment might be magnified in secret reports to Mr. Hearst . Whatever the Hetman's ambitions , his colleagues were kept ill at ease . Among the outstanding members of the Hearst cabinet whom he successfully opposed for a time were the great Arthur Brisbane , Bradford Merrill , S.S. Carvalho , and Colonel Van Hamm . He also disliked Runyon , for no good reason other than the fact that the Demon's talent was so marked as to put him well beyond the Hetman's say-so or his supervision . Runyon , for his part , had a contemptuous regard for Mr. Watson . `` He's a wrong-o '' , said Runyon , `` and I wouldn't trust him as far as I could throw the Statue of Liberty '' . Arthur `` Bugs '' Baer wrote to me just recently , `` Vic wanted to die in harness , with his head towards the wagon . He supported his mother and his brother , who afterwards committed suicide . Watson told me that his brother always sent roses to his mother , blossoms bought with Vic's allowance to him . ' And would you believe it ' , Vic added , ' she likes him better than she does me . Why ' '' ? ? About the only time the Hetman seemed excited was when one of his own pet ideas was born . Then he would get to his feet , as though rising in honor of his own remarkable powers , and say almost invariably , `` Gentlemen , this is an amazing story ! ! It's bigger than the Armistice '' . Some of the Hetman's `` ideas '' were dream-ridden , vaguely imparted , and at times preposterous . One day he assigned me to lay bare a `` plot '' by the Duponts to supply munitions to a wholly fictitious revolution he said was about to occur in Cuba . He said that his information was so secret that he would not be able to confide in me the origin of his pipeline tip . `` I can tell you this much '' , he said . It's bigger than the Armistice '' . I worked for a day on this plainly ridiculous assignment and consulted several of my own well-informed sources . Then I spent the next two days at the baseball park and at Jack Doyle's pool parlors . When I returned to make my report , the Hetman did not remember having sent me on the secret mission . He was busy , he said , in having someone submit to a monkey-gland operation . And I was to go to work on that odd matter . I shall tell of it later on . The Hetman had a strong liking for a story , any story which was to be had by means of much sleuthing or by roundabout methods . Most of my stories were obtained by simply seeking out the person who could give me the facts , and not as a rule by playing clever tricks . One day I tired of following the Hetman's advice of `` shadowing '' and of the `` ring-around-the-rosie '' approach to a report that Enrico Caruso had pinched a lady's hip while visiting the Central Park monkey house . I explained my state of mind to artist Winsor McCay and to `` Bugs '' Baer . Mr. Baer obtained a supply of crepe hair and spirit-gum from an actor at the Friars . We fashioned beards , put them on , and reported to the Hetman at the city desk . Mr. Baer had an auburn beard , like Longfellow's . Mr. McCay had on a sort of Emperor Maximilian beard and mustache . As for myself , I had on an enormous black `` muff '' . This , together with a derby hat and horn-rim eyeglasses , gave me the appearance of a Russian nihilist . `` We are ready for your next mysterious assignment '' , said Mr. Baer to the Hetman . `` Where to , sir '' ? ? Mr. Watson did not have much humor in his make-up , but he managed a mirthless smile . Just then a reporter telephoned in from the Bronx to give the rewrite desk an account of a murder . The Hetman told me to take the story over the phone and to write it . While I was sitting at one of the rewrite telephones with my derby and my great beard , Arthur Brisbane whizzed in with some editorial copy in his hand . He paused for a moment to look at me , then went on to the city desk to deliver his `` Today '' column . I thought it expedient to take off my derby , my glasses , and the beard ; ; and also to change telephones . I managed to do this by the time the great A.B. returned to the place where he last had seen the fierce nihilist . He stood there staring with disbelief at the vacant desk . Then he wrinkled his huge brow and went slowly out of the room . He had a somewhat goggle-eyed expression . He had been `` seeing things '' . The Hetman's `` ideas '' for news stories or editorial campaigns were by no means always fruitless or lacking in merit . He campaigned successfully for the riddance of `` Death Avenue '' and also brought about the ending of pollution of metropolitan beaches by sewage . He exposed the bucket-shop racket with the able assistance of two excellent reporters , Nat Ferber and Carl Helm . In the conduct of these and many other campaigns , the Hetman proved to be a much abler journalist than his critics allowed . It seems to me now , in a long backward glance , that many of the Hetman's conceits and odd actions -- together with his grim posture when brandishing the hatchet in the name of Mr. Hearst -- were keyed with the tragedy which was to close over him one day . Alone , rejected on every hand , divorced , and in financial trouble , he leaped from an eleventh-floor window of the Abbey Hotel in 1937 . One finds it difficult to pass censure on the lonely figure who waited for days for a saving word from his zealously served idol , W.R. Hearst . That word was withheld when the need of it seemed the measure of his despair . The unfinished note , written in pencil upon the back of a used envelope , and addressed to the coroner , makes one wonder about many things : `` God forgive me for everything . I cannot '' Much to Damon Runyon's amazement , as well as my own , I got along splendidly with the Hetman ; ; that is , until I became an editor , hence , in his eyes , a rival . Not long after Colonel Van Hamm had foisted me on the Watson staff I received a salary raise and a contract on the Hetman's recommendation . During the next years he gave me the second of the five contracts I would sign with the Hearst Service . It was a somewhat unusual thing for a reporter to have a contract in those days before the epidemic of syndicated columnists . I would like to believe that my ability warranted this advancement . Somehow I think that Watson paid more attention to me than he otherwise might have because his foe , Colonel Van Hamm , wouldn't touch me with a ten-foot blue pencil . I remember one day when Mr. Hearst ( and I never knew why he liked me , either ) sent the Hetman a telegram : `` Please find some more reporters like that young man from Denver '' . Watson showed this wire to Colonel Van Hamm . The colonel grunted , then made a remark which might be construed in either of two ways . `` Don't bother to look any further . We already have the only one of its kind '' . The Hetman did have friends , but they were mostly outside the newspaper profession . Sergeant Mike Donaldson , Congressional Medal of Honor soldier , was one of them . Dr. Menas S. Gregory was another . I used to go with Watson to call on the eminent neurologist at his apartment , to sit among the doctor's excellent collection of statues , paintings , and books and drink Oriental coffee while Watson seemed to thaw out and become almost affable . There was one time , however , when his face clouded and he suddenly blurted , `` Why did my brother commit suicide '' ? ? I cannot remember Dr. Gregory's reply , if , indeed , he made one . If she were not at home , Mama would see to it that a fresh white rose was there . Sometimes , Mrs. Coolidge would close herself in the Green Suite on the second floor , and play the piano she had brought to the White House . Mama knew she was playing her son's favorite pieces and feeling close to him , and did not disturb her . All the rest of the days in the White House would be shadowed by the tragic loss , even though the President tried harder than ever to make his little dry jokes and to tease the people around him . A little boy came to give the President his personal condolences , and the President gave word that any little boy who wanted to see him was to be shown in . Backstairs , the maids cried a little over that , and the standing invitation was not mentioned to Mrs. Coolidge . The President was even more generous with the First Lady than he had been before the tragedy . He would bring her boxes of candy and other presents to coax a smile to her lips . He brought her shawls . Dresses were short in the days of Mrs. Coolidge , and Spanish shawls were thrown over them . He got her dozens of them . One shawl was so tremendous that she could not wear it , so she draped it over the banister on the second floor , and it hung over the stairway . The President used to look at it with a ghost of a smile . Mrs. Coolidge spent more time in her bedroom among her doll collection . She kept the dolls on the Lincoln bed . At night , when Mama would turn back the covers , she would have to take all the dolls off the bed and place them elsewhere for the night . Mama always felt that the collection symbolized Mrs. Coolidge's wish for a little girl . Among the dolls was one that meant very much to the First Lady , who would pick it up and look at it often . It had a tiny envelope tied to its wrist . An accompanying sympathetic letter explained that inside the envelope was a name for Mrs. Coolidge's first granddaughter . Mama knew this doll was meant to help Mrs. Coolidge overcome her grief by turning her eyes to the future . The name inside the envelope was `` Cynthia '' . The Coolidges' life , after the death of their son , was quieter than ever . John was away at school most of the time . Mrs. Coolidge would knit , and the President would sit reading , or playing with the many pets around them . Now and then , the President would call for `` Little Jack , Master of the Hounds '' , which was his nickname for a messenger who had worked in the White House since Teddy Roosevelt's administration , and discuss the welfare of some one of the animals . It was part of Little Jack's work to look after the dogs . One White House dog was immortalized in a painting . That was Rob Roy , who posed with Mrs. Coolidge for the portrait by Howard Chandler Christy . To get him to pose , Mrs. Coolidge would feed him candy , so he enjoyed the portrait sessions as well as she did . I would like to straighten out a misconception about the dress Mrs. Coolidge is wearing in this painting . It is not the same dress as the one on her manikin in the Smithsonian . People think the dress in the picture was lengthened by an artist much later on . This is not true . The dress in the painting is a bright red , with rhinestones forming a spray on the right side . There is a long train flowing from the shoulders . Mrs. Coolidge gave Mama this dress for me , and I wore it many times . I still have the dress , and I hope to give it to the Smithsonian Institution as a memento , or , as I more fondly hope , to present it to a museum containing articles showing the daily lives of the Presidents -- if I can get it organized . But to get back to the Coolidge household , Mrs. Coolidge so obviously loved dogs , that the public sent her more dogs -- Calamity Jane , Timmy , and Blackberry . The last two were a red and a black chow . Rob Roy remained boss of all the dogs . He showed them what to do , and taught them how to keep the maids around the White House in a state of terror . The dogs would run through the halls after him like a burst of bullets , and all the maids would run for cover . Mama didn't know what to do -- whether to tell on Rob Roy or not -- since she had the ear of Mrs. Coolidge more than the other maids . But she was afraid the First Lady would not understand , because Rob Roy was a perfect angel with the First Family . Every day , when the President took his nap , Rob Roy would stretch out on the window seat near him , like a perfect gentleman , and stare thoughtfully out the window , or he would take a little nap himself . He would not make a sound until the President had wakened and left for the office ; ; then he would bark to let everyone know the coast was clear . His signal was for the other dogs to come running , but it was also the signal for Mama and the other maids to watch out . Rob Roy was self-appointed to accompany the President to his office every morning . Rob Roy was well aware of the importance of this mission , and he would walk in front of the President , looking neither to the right nor to the left . At dinner , lunch , or breakfast , the President would call out , `` Supper '' ! ! -- he called all meals supper -- after the butler had announced the meal . All the dogs would dash to get on the elevator with the President and go to the dining room . They would all lie around on the rug during the meal , a very pretty sight as Rob Roy , Prudence , and Calamity Jane were all snow-white . When Prudence and Blackberry were too young to be trusted in the dining room , they were tied to the radiator with their leashes , and they would cry . Mama tried to talk to them and keep them quiet while she tidied up the sitting room before the First Family returned . Finally , Mama did mention to Mrs. Coolidge that she felt sorry for the little dogs , and then Mrs. Coolidge decided to leave the radio on for them while she was gone , even though her husband disapproved of the waste of electricity . Mama was now the first maid to Mrs. Coolidge , because Catherine , the previous first maid , had become ill and died . Mrs. Coolidge chose Mama in her place . It was a high mark for Mama . Every First Family seems to have one couple upon whom it relies for true friendship . For the Coolidges , it was Mr. and Mrs. Frank W. Stearns of Boston , Massachusetts , owners of a large department store . They seemed to be at the White House half the time . The butlers were amused because when the Stearns were there , the President would say grace at breakfast . If the Stearns were not there , grace would be omitted . Speaking of breakfast , the President inaugurated a new custom -- that of conducting business at the breakfast table . The word was that this too was part of an economy move on his part . A new bill had been passed under Harding that designated the Government , rather than the President , as the tab-lifter for official meals . So the President would make a hearty breakfast official by inviting Government officials to attend . He caused a lot of talk when he also chose the breakfast hour to have the barber come in and trim his hair while he ate . Mama said that if Presidents were supposed to be colorful , Mr. Coolidge certainly made a good president . He knew exactly how to be colorful ! ! The favorite guest of the house , as far as the staff was concerned , was Mr. Wrigley , the chewing gum king . The White House had chewing gum until it could chew no more , and every Christmas , Mr. Wrigley sent the President a check for $100 , to be divided among all the help . You can imagine that he got pretty good service . Another good friend of the Coolidges' was George B. Harvey , who was the Ambassador to Great Britain from 1921 to 1923 . He had been a friend of the Hardings , and continued to be invited by the Coolidges . The first royalty whom Mama ever waited on in the White House was Queen Marie of Rumania , who came to a State dinner given in her honor on October 21 , 1926 . She was not an overnight guest in the White House , but Mr. Ike Hoover , the chief usher , had Mama check her fur coat when she came in , and take care of her needs . Mama said she was one of the prettiest ladies she had ever seen . Mama was very patriotic , and one of the duties she was proudest of was repairing the edges of the flag that flew above the White House . Actually , two flags were used at the mansion -- a small one on rainy days , and a big one on bright days . The wool would become frazzled around the edges from blowing in the wind , and Mama would mend it . She would often go up on the roof to see the attendant take down the flag in the evening . She used to tell me , `` When I stand there and look at the flag blowing this way and that way , I have the wonderful , safe feeling that Americans are protected no matter which way the wind blows '' . Even when Mrs. Coolidge was in mourning for her son , she reached out to help other people in trouble . One person she helped was my brother . Mama had told her how Emmett's lungs had been affected when he was gassed in the war . He was in and out of Mount Alto Hospital for veterans any number of times . Taking a personal interest , she had the doctor assigned to the White House , Dr. James Coupal , look Emmett over . As a result , he was sent to a hospital in Arizona until his health improved enough for him to come back to Washington to work in the Government service . But again , there was danger that his lungs would suffer in the muggy Washington weather , and he had to return to the dry climate of the West to live and work . When Mrs. Coolidge was in mourning , she did not wear black . She wore grey every day , and white every evening . Mama knew that she was out of mourning when she finally wore bright colors . The President helped her a lot by selecting some lovely colored dresses to get her started . She opened the boxes with a tear in her eye and a sad smile on her face . On the social side , the chore Mama had at the formal receptions at the White House thrilled her the most . It was her job to stand at the foot of the stairs , and , just as the First Lady stepped off the last tread , Mama would straighten out her long train before she marched to the Blue Room to greet her guests with the President . Mama would enjoy the sight of the famous guests as much as anyone , and would note a gown here and there to tell me about that night . One night , Mama came home practically in a state of shock . She had stood at the bottom of the stairs , as usual , when Mrs. Coolidge came down , in the same dress that is now in the Smithsonian , to greet her guests . Mama stooped down to fix the train , but there was no train there ! ! She reached and reached around the dress , but there was nothing there . She looked up and saw that , without knowing it , Mrs. Coolidge was holding it aloft . Mrs. Coolidge looked down , saw Mama's horrified expression and quickly let the whole thing fall to the floor . Mama swirled the train in place , and not a step was lost . The Coolidges did not always live at the White House during the Presidency . Impressive as this enumeration is , it barely hints at the diverse perceptions of Jews , collectively or individually , that have been attested by their Gentile environment . It is reasonable to affirm two propositions : Jews have been perceived by non-Jews as all things to all men ; ; some Jews have in fact been all things to all men . In the arena of power Jews have at one time or another been somebody's ally ; ; they have observed correct neutrality ; ; they have been someone's enemy . In the market place Jews have in fact under various circumstances been valued customers and suppliers , or clannish monopolists and cutthroat competitors . And so on through the roles referred to in the previous paragraph . Diversity of perception , yes ; ; diversity of fact , yes . But the two do not invariably or even typically coincide . The `` conventional '' image of a particular time and place is not necessarily congruent with the image of the facts as established over the years by scholarly and scientific research . Conventional images of Jews have this in common with all perceptions of a configuration in which one feature is held constant : images can be both true and false . The genuinely interesting question , then , becomes : What factors determine the degree of realism or distortion in conventional images of Jews ? ? The working test of `` the facts '' must always be the best available description obtainable from scholars and scientists who have applied their methods of investigation to relevant situations . Granted , such `` functional '' images are subject to human error ; ; they are self-correcting in the sense that they are subject to disciplined procedures that check and recheck against error . In accounting for realism or distortion two sets of factors can be usefully distinguished : current intelligence ; ; predispositions regarding intelligence . General Grant may have been the victim of false information in the instance reported in this book ; ; if so , he would not be the first or last commanding officer who has succumbed to bad information and dubious estimates of the future . But General Grant may have been self-victimized . He may have entered the situation with predispositions that prepared him to act uncritically in the press of affairs . Predispositions , in turn , fall conveniently into two categories for purposes of analysis . To some extent predispositions are shaped by exposure to group environments . In some measure they depend upon the structure of individual personality . The anti-Semitism of Hitler owed something to his exposure to the ideology of Lueger's politically successful Christian socialist movement in Vienna . But millions of human beings were exposed to Lueger's propaganda and record . After allowing for group exposures , it is apparent that other factors must be considered if we are to comprehend fanaticism . These are personality factors ; ; they include harmonies and conflicts within the whole man , and mechanisms whereby inner components are more or less smoothly met . Modern psychiatric knowledge provides us with many keys to unlock the significance of behavior of the kind . The foregoing factors are pertinent to the analysis of perceptual images and the broad conditions under which they achieve realism or fall short of it . Undoubtedly one merit of the vast panorama of Gentile conceptions of the Jew unfolded in the present anthology is that it provides a formidable body of material that invites critical examination in terms of reality . Many selections are themselves convincing contributions to this appraisal . Undoubtedly , however , the significance of the volume is greater than the foregoing paragraphs suggest . Speaking as a non-Jew I believe that its primary contribution is in the realm of future policy . Since we can neither undo nor redo the past , we are limited to the events of today and tomorrow . In this domain the simple fact of coexistence in the same local , national , and world community is enough to guarantee that we cannot refrain from having some effect , large or small , upon Gentile-Jewish relations . What shall these effects be ? ? I am deliberately raising the policy problems involved in Gentile-Jewish relations . Comprehensive examination of any policy question calls for the performance of the intellectual tasks inseparable from any problem-solving method . The tasks are briefly indicated by these questions : What are my goals in Gentile-Jewish relations ? ? What are the historical trends in this country and abroad in the extent to which these goals are effectively realized ? ? What factors condition the degree of realization at various times and places ? ? What is the probable course of future developments ? ? What policies if adopted and applied in various circumstances will increase the likelihood that future events will coincide with desired events and do so at least cost in terms of all human values ? ? It is beyond the province of this epilogue to cover policy questions of such depth and range . The discussion is therefore limited to a suggested procedure for realizing at least some of the potential importance of this volume for future policy . As a groundwork for the proposal I give some attention to the first task enumerated above , the clarification of goal . My reply is that I associate myself with all those who affirm that Gentile-Jewish relations should contribute to the theory and practice of human dignity . The basic goal finds partial expression in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , a statement initiated and endorsed by individuals and organizations of many religious and philosophical traditions . Within this frame of reference policies appropriate to claims advanced in the name of the Jews depend upon which Jewish identity is involved , as well as upon the nature of the claim , the characteristics of the claimant , the justifications proposed , and the predispositions of the community decision makers who are called upon to act . If Jews are identified as a religious body in a controversy that comes before a national or international tribunal , it is obviously compatible with the goal of human dignity to protect freedom of worship . When decision makers act within this frame they determine whether a claim put forward in the name of religion is to be accepted by the larger community as appropriate to religion . Since the recognition of Israel as a nation state , claims are made in many cases which identify the claimant as a member of the new body politic . Community decision makers must make up their minds whether a claim is acceptable to the larger community in terms of prevailing expectations regarding members of nation states . In free countries many controversies involve self-styled Jews who use the symbol in asserting a vaguely `` cultural '' rather than religious or political identity . The decision maker who acts for the community as a whole must decide whether the objectives pursued and the methods used are appropriate to public policy regarding cultural groups . We know that much is made of the multiplicity and ambiguity of the identities that cluster around the key symbol of the Jew . Many public and private controversies will undoubtedly continue to reflect these confusions in the mind and usage of Gentile and Jew . However , in the context of legal and civic policy , these controversies are less than novel . They involve similar uncertainties regarding the multiple identities of any number of non-Jewish groups . So far as the existing body of formal principle and procedure is concerned , categorical novelties are not to be anticipated in Jewish-Gentile relationships ; ; claims are properly disposed of according to norms common to all parties . It is not implied that formal principles and procedures are so firmly entrenched within the public order of the world community or even of free commonwealths that they will control in all circumstances involving Jews and Gentiles during coming years . Social process is always anchored in past predisposition ; ; but it is perennially restructured in situations where anchors are dragged or lost . In conformance with the maximization principle we affirm that Gentile-Jewish relations will be harmonious or inharmonious to the degree that one relation or the other is expected by the active participants to yield the greatest net advantage , taking all value outcomes and effects into consideration . It is not difficult to anticipate circumstances in which negative tensions will cumulate ; ; for instance , imagine the situation if Israel ever joins an enemy coalition . The formal position of Americans who identify themselves with one or more of the several identities of the Jewish symbol is already clear ; ; the future weight of informal factors cannot be so easily assessed . When we consider the disorganized state of the world community , and the legacy of predispositions adversely directed against all who are identified as Jews , it is obvious that the struggle for the minds and muscles of men needs to be prosecuted with increasing vigor and skill . During moments of intense crisis the responsibility of political leaders is overwhelming . But their freedom of policy is limited by the pattern of predisposition with which they and the people around them enter the crisis . At such critical moments predispositions favorable to human dignity most obviously `` pay off '' . By the same test predispositions destructive of human personality exercise their most sinister impact , with the result that men of good will are often trapped and nullified . Among measures in anticipation of crisis are plans to inject into the turmoil as assistants of key decision makers qualified persons who are cognizant of the corrosive effect of crisis upon personal relationships and are also able to raise calm and realistic voices when overburdened leaders near the limit of self-control . We are learning how to do these things in some of the vast organized structures of modern society ; ; the process can be accelerated . A truism is that the time to prepare for the worst is when times are best . During intercrisis periods the educational facilities of the community have the possibility of remolding the perspectives and altering the behavior of vast numbers of human beings of every age and condition . As more men and women are made capable of living up to the challenge of decency the chances are improved that the pattern of predisposition prevailing in positions of strength in future crises can be favorably affected . Now an abiding difficulty of paragraphs like the foregoing is that they appear to preach ; ; and in contemporary society we often complain of too much reaffirmation of the goodness of the good . In any case I do not intend to let the present occasion pass without dealing more directly with the problem of implementing good intentions . I assume that the number of readers of this anthology who regard themselves as morally perfect is small , and that most readers are willing to consider procedures by which they may gain more insight into themselves and better understanding of others . Properly used , the present book is an excellent instrument of enlightenment . Let us not confuse the issue by labeling the objective or the method `` psychoanalytic '' , for this is a well established term of art for the specific ideas and procedures initiated by Sigmund Freud and his followers for the study and treatment of disordered personalities . The traditional method proceeds by the technique of free association , punctuated by interpretations proposed by the psychoanalytic interviewer . What we have in mind does have something in common with the goals of psychoanalysis and with the methods by which they are sought . For what we propose , however , a psychoanalyst is not necessary , even though one aim is to enable the reader to get beneath his own defenses -- his defenses of himself to himself . For this purpose a degree of intellectual and emotional involvement is necessary ; ; but involvement needs to be accompanied by a special frame of mind . The relatively long and often colorful selections in this anthology enable the reader to become genuinely absorbed in what is said , whether he responds with anger or applause . But simple involvement is not enough ; ; self-discovery calls for an open , permissive , inquiring posture of self-observation . The symposium provides an opportunity to confront the self with specific statements which were made at particular times by identifiable communicators who were addressing definite audiences -- and throughout several hundred pages everyone is talking about the same key symbol of identification . An advantage of being exposed to such specificity about an important and recurring feature of social reality is that it can be taken advantage of by the reader to examine covert as well as overt resonances within himself , resonances triggered by explicit symbols clustering around the central figure of the Jew . Two facets of this aspect of the literary process have special significance for our time . One , a reservation on the point I have just made , is the phenomenon of pseudo-thinking , pseudo-feeling , and pseudo-willing , which Fromm discussed in The Escape From Freedom . In essence this involves grounding one's thought and emotion in the values and experience of others , rather than in one's own values and experience . There is a risk that instead of teaching a person how to be himself , reading fiction and drama may teach him how to be somebody else . Clearly what the person brings to the reading is important . Moreover , if the critic instructs his audience in what to see in a work , he is contributing to this pseudo-thinking ; ; if he instructs them in how to evaluate a work , he is helping them to achieve their own identity . The second timely part of this sketch of literature and the search for identity has to do with the difference between good and enduring literary works and the ephemeral mass culture products of today . In the range and variety of characters who , in their literary lives , get along all right with life styles one never imagined possible , there is an implicit lesson in differentiation . The reader , observing this process , might ask `` why not be different '' ? ? And find in the answer a license to be a variant of the human species . The observer of television or other products for a mass audience has only a permit to be , like the models he sees , even more like everybody else . And this , I think , holds for values as well as life styles . One would need to test this proposition carefully ; ; after all , the large ( and probably unreliable ) Reader's Digest literature on the `` most unforgettable character I ever met '' deals with village grocers , country doctors , favorite if illiterate aunts , and so forth . Scientists often turn out to be idiosyncratic , too . But still , the proposition is worth examination . It is possible that the study of literature affects the conscience , the morality , the sensitivity to some code of `` right '' and `` wrong '' . I do not know that this is true ; ; both Flugel and Ranyard West deal with the development and nature of conscience , as do such theologians as Niebuhr and Buber . It forms the core of many , perhaps most , problems of psychotherapy . I am not aware of great attention by any of these authors or by the psychotherapeutic profession to the role of literary study in the development of conscience -- most of their attention is to a pre-literate period of life , or , for the theologians of course , to the influence of religion . Still , it would be surprising if what one reads did not contribute to one's ideas of right and wrong ; ; certainly the awakened alarm over the comic books and the continuous concern over prurient literature indicate some peripheral aspects of this influence . Probably the most important thing to focus on is not the development of conscience , which may well be almost beyond the reach of literature , but the contents of conscience , the code which is imparted to the developed or immature conscience available . This is in large part a code of behavior and a glossary of values : what is it that people do and should do and how one should regard it . In a small way this is illustrated by the nineteenth-century novelist who argued for the powerful influence of literature as a teacher of society and who illustrated this with the way a girl learned to meet her lover , how to behave , how to think about this new experience , how to exercise restraint . Literature may be said to give people a sense of purpose , dedication , mission , significance . This , no doubt , is part of what Gilbert Seldes implies when he says of the arts , `` They give form and meaning to life which might otherwise seem shapeless and without sense '' . Men seem almost universally to want a sense of function , that is , a feeling that their existence makes a difference to someone , living or unborn , close and immediate or generalized . Feeling useless seems generally to be an unpleasant sensation . A need so deeply planted , asking for direction , so to speak , is likely to be gratified by the vivid examples and heroic proportions of literature . The terms `` renewal '' and `` refreshed '' , which often come up in aesthetic discussion , seem partly to derive their import from the `` renewal '' of purpose and a `` refreshed '' sense of significance a person may receive from poetry , drama , and fiction . The notion of `` inspiration '' is somehow cognate to this feeling . How literature does this , or for whom , is certainly not clear , but the content , form , and language of the `` message '' , as well as the source , would all play differentiated parts in giving and molding a sense of purpose . One of the most salient features of literary value has been deemed to be its influence upon and organization of emotion . Let us differentiate a few of these ideas . The Aristotelian notion of catharsis , the purging of emotion , is a persistent and viable one . The idea here is one of discharge but this must stand in opposition to a second view , Plato's notion of the arousal of emotion . A third idea is that artistic literature serves to reduce emotional conflicts , giving a sense of serenity and calm to individuals . This is given some expression in Beardsley's notion of harmony and the resolution of indecision . A fourth view is the transformation of emotion , as in Housman's fine phrase on the arts : they `` transform and beautify our inner nature '' . It is possible that the idea of enrichment of emotion is a fifth idea . F.S.C. Northrop , in his discussion of The `` Functions And Future Of Poetry '' , suggests this : `` One of the things which makes our lives drab and empty and which leaves us , at the end of the day , fatigued and deflated spiritually is the pressure of the taxing , practical , utilitarian concern of common-sense objects . If art is to release us from these postulated things ( things we must think symbolically about ) and bring us back to the ineffable beauty and richness of the aesthetic component of reality in its immediacy , it must sever its connection with these common sense entities '' . I take the central meaning here to be the contrast between the drab empty quality of life without literature and a life enriched by it . Richards' view of the aesthetic experience might constitute a sixth variety : for him it constitutes , in part , the organization of impulses . A sketch of the emotional value of the study of literature would have to take account of all of these . But there is one in particular which , it seems to me , deserves special attention . In the wide range of experiences common to our earth-bound race none is more difficult to manage , more troublesome , and more enduring in its effects than the control of love and hate . The study of literature contributes to this control in a curious way . William Wimsatt and Cleanth Brooks , it seems to me , have a penetrating insight into the way in which this control is effected : `` For if we say poetry is to talk of beauty and love ( and yet not aim at exciting erotic emotion or even an emotion of Platonic esteem ) and if it is to talk of anger and murder ( and yet not aim at arousing anger and indignation ) -- then it may be that the poetic way of dealing with these emotions will not be any kind of intensification , compounding , or magnification , or any direct assault upon the affections at all . Something indirect , mixed , reconciling , tensional might well be the stratagem , the devious technique by which a poet indulged in all kinds of talk about love and anger and even in something like `` expressions '' of these emotions , without aiming at their incitement or even uttering anything that essentially involves their incitement '' . The rehearsal through literature of emotional life under controlled conditions may be a most valuable human experience . Here I do not mean catharsis , the discharge of emotion . I mean something more like Freud's concept of the utility of `` play '' to a small child : he plays `` house '' or `` doctor '' or `` fireman '' as a way of mastering slightly frightening experiences , reliving them imaginatively until they are under control . There is a second feature of the influences of literature , good literature , on emotional life which may have some special value for our time . In B. M. Spinley's portrayal of the underprivileged and undereducated youth of London , a salient finding was the inability to postpone gratification , a need to satisfy impulses immediately without the pleasure of anticipation or of savoring the experience . Perhaps it is only an analogy , but one of the most obvious differences between cheap fiction and fiction of an enduring quality is the development of a theme or story with leisure and anticipation . Anyone who has watched children develop a taste for literature will understand what I mean . It is at least possible that the capacity to postpone gratification is developed as well as expressed in a continuous and guided exposure to great literature . In any inquiry into the way in which great literature affects the emotions , particularly with respect to the sense of harmony , or relief of tension , or sense of `` a transformed inner nature '' which may occur , a most careful exploration of the particular feature of the experience which produces the effect would be required . In the calm which follows the reading of a poem , for example , is the effect produced by the enforced quiet , by the musical quality of words and rhythm , by the sentiments or sense of the poem , by the associations with earlier readings , if it is familiar , by the boost to the self-esteem for the semi-literate , by the diversion of attention , by the sense of security in a legitimized withdrawal , by a kind license for some variety of fantasy life regarded as forbidden , or by half-conscious ideas about the magical power of words ? ? These are , if the research is done with subtlety and skill , researchable topics , but the research is missing . One of the most frequent views of the value of literature is the education of sensibility that it is thought to provide . Sensibility is a vague word , covering an area of meaning rather than any precise talent , quality , or skill . Among other things it means perception , discrimination , sensitivity to subtle differences . Both the extent to which this is true and the limits of the field of perceptual skill involved should be acknowledged . Its truth is illustrated by the skill , sensitivity , and general expertise of the English professor with whom one attends the theatre . The limits are suggested by an imaginary experiment : contrast the perceptual skill of English professors with that of their colleagues in discriminating among motor cars , political candidates , or female beauty . Along these lines , the particular point that sensitivity in literature leads to sensitivity in human relations would require more proof than I have seen . In a symposium and general exploration of the field of Personal Perception and Interpersonal Behavior the discussion does not touch upon this aspect of the subject , with one possible exception ; ; Solomon Asch shows the transcultural stability of metaphors based on sensation ( hot , sweet , bitter , etc. ) dealing with personal qualities of human beings and events . But to go from here to the belief that those more sensitive to metaphor and language will also be more sensitive to personal differences is too great an inferential leap . I would say , too , that the study of literature tends to give a person what I shall call depth . I use this term to mean three things : a search for the human significance of an event or state of affairs , a tendency to look at wholes rather than parts , and a tendency to respond to these events and wholes with feeling . It is the obverse of triviality , shallowness , emotional anaesthesia . I think these attributes cluster , but I have no evidence . In fact , I can only say this seems to me to follow from a wide , continuous , and properly guided exposure to literary art . The late R. G. Collingwood , a philosopher whose work has proved helpful to many students of literature , once wrote `` : : We are all , though many of us are snobbish enough to wish to deny it , in far closer sympathy with the art of the music-hall and picture-palace than with Chaucer and Cimabue , or even Shakespeare and Titian . By an effort of historical sympathy we can cast our minds back into the art of a remote past or an alien present , and enjoy the carvings of cavemen and Japanese colour-prints ; ; but the possibility of this effort is bound up with that development of historical thought which is the greatest achievement of our civilization in the last two centuries , and it is utterly impossible to people in whom this development has not taken place . The natural and primary aesthetic attitude is to enjoy contemporary art , to despise and dislike the art of the recent past , and wholly to ignore everything else '' . One might argue that the ultimate purpose of literary scholarship is to correct this spontaneous provincialism that is likely to obscure the horizons of the general public , of the newspaper critic , and of the creative artist himself . There results a study of literature freed from the tyranny of the contemporary . Such study may take many forms . The study of ideas in literature is one of these . Of course , it goes without saying that no student of ideas can justifiably ignore the contemporary scene . He will frequently return to it . The continuities , contrasts , and similarities discernible when past and present are surveyed together are inexhaustible and the one is often understood through the other . When we assert the value of such study , we find ourselves committed to an important assumption . Most students of literature , whether they call themselves scholars or critics , are ready to argue that it is possible to understand literary works as well as to enjoy them . Many will add that we may find our enjoyment heightened by our understanding . This understanding , of course , may in its turn take many forms and some of these -- especially those most interesting to the student of comparative literature -- are essentially historical . But the historian of literature need not confine his attention to biography or to stylistic questions of form , `` texture '' , or technique . He may also consider ideas . It is true that this distinction between style and idea often approaches the arbitrary since in the end we must admit that style and content frequently influence or interpenetrate one another and sometimes appear as expressions of the same insight . But , in general , we may argue that the student can direct the primary emphasis of his attention toward one or the other . At this point a working definition of idea is in order , although our first definition will have to be qualified somewhat as we proceed . The term idea refers to our more reflective or thoughtful consciousness as opposed to the immediacies of sensuous or emotional experience . It is through such reflection that literature approaches philosophy . An idea , let us say , may be roughly defined as a theme or topic with which our reflection may be concerned . In this essay , we are , along with most historians , interested in the more general or more inclusive ideas , that are so to speak `` writ large '' in history of literature where they recur continually . Outstanding among these is the idea of human nature itself , including the many definitions that have been advanced over the centuries ; ; also secondary notions such as the perfectibility of man , the depravity of man , and the dignity of man . One might , indeed , argue that the history of ideas , in so far as it includes the literatures , must center on characterizations of human nature and that the great periods of literary achievement may be distinguished from one another by reference to the images of human nature that they succeed in fashioning . We need not , to be sure , expect to find such ideas in every piece of literature . An idea , of the sort that we have in mind , although of necessity readily available to imagination , is more general in connotation than most poetic or literary images , especially those appearing in lyric poems that seek to capture a moment of personal experience . Thus Burns's `` My love is like a red , red rose '' and Hopkins' `` The thunder-purple sea-beach , plumed purple of Thunder '' although clearly intelligible in content , hardly present ideas of the sort with which we are here concerned . On the other hand , Arnold's `` The unplumbed , salt , estranging sea '' , taken in its context , certainly does so . Understanding a work of art involves recognition of the ideas that it reflects or embodies . Thus the student of literature may sometimes find it helpful to classify a poem or an essay as being in idea or in ideal content or subject matter typical or atypical of its period . Again , he may discover embodied within its texture a theme or idea that has been presented elsewhere and at other times in various ways . Our understanding will very probably require both these commentaries . Very likely it will also include a recognition that the work we are reading reflects or `` belongs to '' some way of thought labelled as a `` school '' or an `` -ism '' , i.e. a complex or `` syndrome '' of ideas occurring together with sufficient prominence to warrant identification . Thus ideas like `` grace '' , `` salvation '' , and `` providence '' cluster together in traditional Christianity . Usually the work studied offers us a special or even an individualized rendering or treatment of the ideas in question , so that the student finds it necessary to distinguish carefully between the several expressions of an `` -ism '' or mode of thought . Accordingly we may speak of the Platonism peculiar to Shelley's poems or the type of Stoicism present in Henley's `` Invictus '' , and we may find that describing such Platonism or such Stoicism and contrasting each with other expressions of the same attitude or mode of thought is a difficult and challenging enterprise . After all , Shelley is no `` orthodox '' or Hellenic Platonist , and even his `` romantic '' Platonism can be distinguished from that of his contemporaries . Again , Henley's attitude of defiance which colors his ideal of self-mastery is far from characteristic of a Stoic thinker like Marcus Aurelius , whose gentle acquiescence is almost Christian , comparable to the patience expressed in Milton's sonnet on his own blindness . In recent years , we have come increasingly to recognize that ideas have a history and that not the least important chapters of this history have to do with thematic or conceptual aspects of literature and the arts , although these aspects should be studied in conjunction with the history of philosophy , of religion , and of the sciences . When these fields are surveyed together , important patterns of relationship emerge indicating a vast community of reciprocal influence , a continuity of thought and expression including many traditions , primarily literary , religious , and philosophical , but frequently including contact with the fine arts and even , to some extent , with science . Here we may observe that at least one modern philosophy of history is built on the assumption that ideas are the primary objectives of the historian's research . Let us quote once more from R. G. Collingwood : `` History is properly concerned with the actions of human beings Regarded from the outside , an action is an event or series of events occurring in the physical world ; ; regarded from the inside , it is the carrying into action of a certain thought The historian's business is to penetrate to the inside of the actions with which he is dealing and reconstruct or rather rethink the thoughts which constituted them . It is a characteristic of thoughts that in re-thinking them we come , ipso facto , to understand why they were thought '' . Such an understanding , although it must seek to be sympathetic , is not a matter of intuition . `` History has this in common with every other science : that the historian is not allowed to claim any single piece of knowledge , except where he can justify his claim by exhibiting to himself in the first place , and secondly to any one else who is both able and willing to follow his demonstration , the grounds upon which it is based . This is what was meant , above , by describing history as inferential . The knowledge in virtue of which a man is an historian is a knowledge of what the evidence at his disposal proves about certain events '' . It is obvious that the historian who seeks to recapture the ideas that have motivated human behavior throughout a given period will find the art and literature of that age one of his central and major concerns , by no means a mere supplement or adjunct of significant historical research . The student of ideas and their place in history will always be concerned with the patterns of transition , which are at the same time patterns of transformation , whereby ideas pass from one area of activity to another . Let us survey for a moment the development of modern thought -- turning our attention from the Reformation toward the revolutionary and romantic movements that follow and dwelling finally on more recent decades . We may thus trace the notion of individual autonomy from its manifestation in religious practice and theological reflection through practical politics and political theory into literature and the arts . Finally we may note that the idea appears in educational theory where its influence is at present widespread . No one will deny that such broad developments and transitions are of great intrinsic interest and the study of ideas in literature would be woefully incomplete without frequent reference to them . Still , we must remember that we cannot construct and justify generalizations of this sort unless we are ready to consider many special instances of influence moving between such areas as theology , philosophy , political thought , and literature . The actual moments of contact are vitally important . These moments are historical events in the lives of individual authors with which the student of comparative literature must be frequently concerned . Perhaps the most powerful and most frequently recurring literary influence on the Western world has been that of the Old and New Testament . Certainly one of the most important comments that can be made upon the spiritual and cultural life of any period of Western civilization during the past sixteen or seventeen centuries has to do with the way in which its leaders have read and interpreted the Bible . This reading and the comments that it evoked constitute the influence . A contrast of the scripture reading of , let us say , St. Augustine , John Bunyan , and Thomas Jefferson , all three of whom found in such study a real source of enlightenment , can tell us a great deal about these three men and the age that each represented and helped bring to conscious expression . In much the same way , we recognize the importance of Shakespeare's familarity with Plutarch and Montaigne , of Shelley's study of Plato's dialogues , and of Coleridge's enthusiastic plundering of the writings of many philosophers and theologians from Plato to Schelling and William Godwin , through which so many abstract ideas were brought to the attention of English men of letters . We may also recognize cases in which the poets have influenced the philosophers and even indirectly the scientists . English philosopher Samuel Alexander's debt to Wordsworth and Meredith is a recent interesting example , as also A. N. Whitehead's understanding of the English romantics , chiefly Shelley and Wordsworth . Hegel's profound admiration for the insights of the Greek tragedians indicates a broad channel of classical influence upon nineteenth-century philosophy . Again the student of evolutionary biology will find a fascinating , if to our minds grotesque , anticipation of the theory of chance variations and the natural elimination of the unfit in Lucretius , who in turn seems to have borrowed the concept from the philosopher Empedocles . Here an important caveat is in order . We must avoid the notion , suggested to some people by examples such as those just mentioned , that ideas are `` units '' in some way comparable to coins or counters that can be passed intact from one group of people to another or even , for that matter , from one individual to another . `` Suppose you take Mr. Hearst's morning American at $10,000 a year '' , Brisbane proposed . `` You could come down to the office once a day , look over a few exchanges , dictate an editorial , and then have the remainder of your time for your more serious literary labors . If within one year you can make a success out of the American , you can practically name your own salary thereafter . Of course , if you don't make the American a success , Hearst will have no further use for you '' . The blue-eyed Watson decided that he would dislike living in New York , and the deal fell through . Hearst's luck was even poorer when he had a chat with Franklin K. Lane , a prominent California journalist and reform politician , whom he asked for his support . Lane was still burning because he had narrowly missed election as governor of California in 1902 and laid his defeat to the antagonism of Hearst's San Francisco Examiner . Hearst disclaimed blame for this , but the conversation , according to Lane , ended on a tart note . `` Mr. Lane '' , Hearst said , `` if you ever wish anything that I can do , all you will have to do will be to send me a telegram asking , and it will be done '' . `` Mr. Hearst '' , Lane replied as he left , `` if you ever get a telegram from me asking you to do anything , you can put the telegram down as a forgery '' . Hearst took a brief respite to hurry home to New York to become a father . On April 10 , 1904 , his first child was born , a son named George after the late Senator . Hearst saw his wife and child , sent a joyful message to his mother in California , and soon returned to Washington , where on April 22 , for the first time , he opened his mouth in Congress . This was not before the House but before the Judiciary Committee , where he asked for action on one of his pet bills , that calling for an investigation of the coal-railroad monopoly . Attorney Shearn had worked on this for two years and had succeeded in getting a report supporting his stand from the United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York . Hearst had spent more than $60,000 of his own money in the probe , but still Attorney General Knox was quiescent . Six of the railroads carrying coal to Tidewater from the Pennsylvania fields , Hearst said , not only had illegal agreements with coal operators but owned outright at least eleven mines . They had watered their stock at immense profit , then had raised the price of coal fifty cents a ton , netting themselves another $20,000,000 in annual profit . `` The Attorney General has been brooding over that evidence like an old hen on a doorknob for eighteen months '' , Hearst said . `` He has not acted in any way , and won't let anyone take it away from him . What I want is to have this evidence come before Congress and if the Attorney General does not report it , as I am very sure he won't , as he has refused to do anything of the kind , I then wish that a committee of seven Representatives be appointed with power to take the evidence . '' The Congressman tried hard , but failed . This was the very sort of legislation that Roosevelt himself had in mind . There can be little doubt that there was a conspiracy in Washington , overt or implied , to block anything Hearst wanted , even if it was something good . Hatred tied his hands in Congress . Roosevelt and others considered him partly responsible for the murder of McKinley . They were repelled by his noisy newspapers , his personal publicity , his presumptuous campaign for the Presidential nomination , and by the swelling cloud of rumor about his moral lapses . He might get votes from his constituents , but he would never get a helping hand in Congress . He was the House pariah . Even the regular Democrats disowned him . Inherently incapable of cooperating with others , he ran his own show regardless of how many party-line Democratic toes he stepped on . He was a political maverick , a reformer with his own program , determined to bulldoze it through or to blazon the infamy of those who balked him . He showed little interest in measures put forward by the regular Democrats . He sought to run Congress as he ran his New York American or Journal , a scheme veteran legislators resisted . For a freshman Congressman to read political Lessons to graybeard Democrats was poor policy for one who needed to make friends . He soon quarreled with all the party leaders in the House , and came to be regarded with detestation by regular Democrats as a professional radical leading a small pack of obedient terriers whose constant snapping was demoralizing to party discipline . To old-line Democrats , the Hearst Presidential boom , now in full cry , was the joke of the new century . Yet no leader had come to the fore who seemed likely to give the puissant T. R. a semblance of a race . There was talk of dragging old ex-President Cleveland out of retirement for another try . Some preferred Judge Alton B. Parker of New York . There was a host of dark horses . The sneers at Hearst changed to concern when it was seen that he had strong support in many parts of the country . Platoons of Hearst agents were traveling from state to state in a surprisingly successful search for delegates at the coming convention , and there were charges that money was doing a large part of the persuading . Just when it was needed for the campaign , Hearst Paper No. 8 , the Boston American , began publication . A Bay State supporter said , `` Mr. Hearst's fight has been helped along greatly by the starting of his paper in Boston '' . His candidacy affected his journalism somewhat . He ordered his editors to tone down on sensationalism and to refrain from using such words as `` seduction '' , `` rape '' , `` abortion '' , `` criminal assault '' and `` born out of wedlock '' . In a story headed , `` Hearst Offers Cash '' , the Republican New York Tribune spread the money rumor , quoting an unnamed `` Hearst supporter '' as saying : `` The argument that is cutting most ice is that Hearst is the only candidate who is fighting the trusts fearlessly and who would use all the powers of government to disrupt them if he were elected . The Hearst men say that if Hearst is nominated , he and his immediate friends will contribute to the Democratic National Committee the sum of $1,500,000 . This , it is urged , would relieve the national committee from the necessity of appealing to the trust magnates . The alternative to this is that if a conservative candidate is nominated the national committee will have to appeal to the trusts for their campaign funds , and in doing this will incur obligations which would make a Democratic victory absolutely fruitless . The average Democratic politician , especially in the country districts , is hungry for the spoils of office . It has been a long time since he has seen any campaign money , and when the proposition is laid down to him as the friends of Mr. Hearst are laying it down these days he is quite likely to get aboard the Hearst bandwagon '' . If anything , the conservative Democrats were more opposed to Hearst than the Republicans . In his own state of New York , the two Democratic bellwethers , State Leader Hill and Tammany Boss Murphy , were saying nothing openly against Hearst but industriously boosting their own favorites , Murphy being for Cleveland and Hill for Parker . They had lost twice with the radical Bryan , and were having no part of Hearst , whom they considered more radical than Bryan . But his increasing strength in the West looked menacing . It caused Henry Watterson to sound a blast in his Louisville Courier-Journal : `` Does any sane Democrat believe that Mr. Hearst , a person unknown even to his constituency and his colleagues , without a word or act in the public life of his country , past or present , that can be shown to be his to commend him , could by any possibility be elected President of the United States ? ? But there is a Hearst barrel . '' More splenetic was Senator Edward Carmack of Tennessee , a Parker man . `` The nomination of Hearst would compass the ruin of the party '' , Carmack said . `` It would be a disgrace , and , as I have already said to the people of Tennessee , if Hearst is nominated , we may as well pen a dispatch , and send it back from the field of battle : ' All is lost , including our honor ' '' . A lone pro-Hearst voice from New York City was that of William Devery , who had been expelled as a Tammany leader but still claimed strong influence in his own district . `` I understand [ Hearst ] is a candidate for Presidential honors '' , Devery said without cracking a smile . `` There's nothing like buildin' from the bottom up . If he's going to the St. Louis convention as a delegate we ought to know it . He's got a lot of friends , and he ought to come along and let us know if he wants our help '' . Hearst won the Iowa state convention , but ran into a bitter battle in Indiana before losing to Parker , drawing an angry statement from Indiana's John W. Kern : `` We are menaced for the first time in the history of the Republic by the open and unblushing effort of a multi-millionaire to purchase the Presidential nomination . Our state has been overrun with a gang of paid agents and retainers . As for the paid Hessians from other states , we are here to instruct the Indiana Democracy in their duty , I have nothing but contempt . The Hearst dollar mark is all over them . '' The talk of a Hearst `` barrel '' was increasing . Another Indiana observer later commented , `` Perhaps we shall never know how much was spent ( by Hearst ) , but if as much money was expended elsewhere as in Indiana a liberal fortune was squandered '' . In his fight for the Illinois and Indiana delegations , Hearst made several trips to Chicago to confer with Andrew Lawrence , the former San Francisco Examiner man who was now his Chicago kingpin , and once to meet with Bryan . On one visit he stopped at the office of the American , where he was known surreptitiously as `` the Great White Chief '' , and for the first time met his managing editor , fat Moses Koenigsberg . Koenigsberg never did learn what Hearst wanted , for the latter shook hands and moved toward the door . `` Never mind , thank you '' , he said . `` I must hurry to catch my train '' . Another editor pointed despairingly at a bundle of letters that had accumulated for him , saying , `` But Mr. Hearst , what shall I do with this correspondence '' ? ? `` I'll show you '' , Hearst replied , grinning . He took the stack of mail and tossed it into the waste basket . `` Don't bother . Every letter answers itself in a couple of weeks '' . 2 . The Hearst `` barrel '' Hearst hopped into a private railroad car with Max Ihmsen and made an arduous personal canvass for delegates in the western and southern states , always wearing a frock coat , listening intently to local politicians , and generally making a good impression . He laughed at a story that he planned to bolt the party if he was not nominated . `` I should , of course '' , he said , `` like any other man , be honored and gratified should the Democrats see fit to nominate me . But I do not have to be bribed by office to be a Democrat . I have supported the Democratic party in the last five campaigns . I supported Cleveland three times and Bryan twice . I intend to support the nominee of the party at St. Louis , whoever he may be '' . The Hearst press followed the Chief's progress at the various state conventions with its usual admiring attention , stressing the `` enthusiasm '' and `` loyalty '' he inspired . This was historic in its way , for it marked the first time an American Presidential aspirant had advertised his own virtues in his own string of newspapers spanning the land . Yet his editors did not abandon their sense of story value . When Nan Patterson , a stunning and money-minded chorus girl who had appeared in a Floradora road show , rode down Broadway in a hansom cab with her married lover , Frank Young , she stopped the cab to disclose that Young had been shot dead , tearfully insisting that he had shot himself although experts said he could not have done so . Trevelyan's Liberalism was above all a liberalism of the spirit , a deep feeling of communion with men fighting for country and for liberty . His passion and enthusiasm convey the courage and high adventure of Garibaldi's exploits and give the reader a unique sense of participation in the events described . The three volumes brought to the fore a characteristic of Trevelyan's prose which remained conspicuous through his later works -- a genius for describing military action with clarity and with authority . The confused rambling of guerrilla warfare , such as most of Garibaldi's campaigns were , was brought to life by Trevelyan's pen in some of the best passages in the books . His personal familiarity with the scenes of action undoubtedly contributed much to the final result , but familiarity alone would not have been enough without other qualities . Military knowledge , love of detail , and a sure feeling for the portrayal of action were the added ingredients . But the Garibaldi volumes were more than a romantic story . Trevelyan contributed considerable new knowledge of the issues connected with his subject . The outstanding example was in Garibaldi And The Thousand , where he made use of unpublished papers of Lord John Russell and English consular materials to reveal the motives which led the British government to permit Garibaldi to cross the Straits of Messina . In looking back over the volumes , it is possible to find errors of interpretation , some of which were not so evident at the time of writing . Thus Trevelyan repeats the story which pictured Victor Emmanuel as refusing to abandon the famous Statuto at the insistence of General Radetzky . Later research has shown this part of the legend of the Re Galantuomo to be false . Trevelyan accepts Italian nationalism with little analysis , he is unduly critical of papal and French policy , and he is more than generous in assessing British policy . But fifty years later the trilogy still maintains a firm place in the list of standard works on the unification of Italy , a position cautiously prophesied by the reviewers at the time of publication . Trevelyan's Manin And The Venetian Revolution Of 1848 , his last major volume on an Italian theme , was written in a minor key . Published in 1923 , it did not gain the popular acclaim of the Garibaldi volumes , probably because Trevelyan felt less at home with Manin , the bourgeois lawyer , than with Garibaldi , the filibuster . The complexities of Venetian politics eluded him , but the story of the revolution itself is told in restrained measures , with no superfluous passages and only an occasional overemphasis of the part played by its leading figure . If it is not one of his best books , it can only be considered unsatisfactory when compared with his own Garibaldi . Already Trevelyan had begun to parallel his nineteenth-century Italian studies with several works on English figures of the same period . First The Life Of John Bright appeared and seven years later Lord Grey Of The Reform Bill . Of the two , The Life Of Bright is incomparably the better biography . Trevelyan centers too exclusively on Bright , is insufficiently appreciative of the views of Bright's opponents and critics , and makes light of the genuine difficulties faced by Peel . Yet he is right when he claims in his autobiography that he drew the real features of the man , his tender and selfless motives and his rugged fearless strength . In the story of Bright and the Corn Law agitation , the Crimean War , the American Civil War , and the franchise struggle Trevelyan reflects something of the moral power which enabled this independent man to exercise so immense an influence over his fellow countrymen for so long . Because Bright's speeches were so much a part of him , there are long and numerous quotations , which , far from making the biography diffuse , help to give us the feel of the man . Associated in a sense with the Manchester School through his mother's family , Trevelyan conveys in this biography something of its moral conviction and drive . Nineteenth-century virtues , however , seem somehow to have gone out of fashion and the Bright book has never been particularly popular . The biography of Lord Grey is strictly speaking not a biography at all . It is a Whig history of the `` Tory reaction '' which preceded the Reform Bill of 1832 , and it uses the figure of Grey to give some unity to the narrative . The volume is a piece of passionate special pleading , written with the heat -- and often with the wisdom , it must be said -- of a Liberal damning the shortsightedness of politicians from 1782 to 1832 . Characteristically , Trevelyan enjoyed writing the work . The theme of glorious summer coming after a long winter of discontent and repression was , he has told us , congenial to his artistic sense . And Grey's Northumberland background was close to Trevelyan's own . But his concentration on personalities and his categorical assessment of their actions fail to convey the political complexities of a long generation harassed by world-wide war and confronted with the problem of adjustment to an unprecedented industrial and social transformation . Some historians have found his point of view not to their taste , others have complained that he makes the Tory tradition appear `` contemptible rather than intelligible '' , while a sympathetic critic has remarked that the `` intricate interplay of social dynamics and political activity of which , at times , politicians are the ignorant marionettes is not a field for the exercise of his talents '' . The Liberal-Radical heritage which informs all of Trevelyan's interpretations of history here seems clearly to have distorted the issues and oversimplified the period . For once his touch deserted him . Research in the period of Grey and Bright led naturally to a more ambitious work . Britain in the nineteenth century is a textbook designed `` to give the sense of continuous growth , to show how economic led to social , and social to political change , how the political events reacted on the economic and social , and how new thoughts and new ideals accompanied or directed the whole complicated process '' . The plan is admirably fulfilled for the period up to 1832 . More temperately than in the study of Grey and despite his Liberal bias , Trevelyan vividly sketches the England of pre-French Revolution days , portrays the stresses and strains of the revolutionary period in rich colors , and brings developments leading to the Reform Bill into sharp and clear focus . His technique is genuinely masterful . By what one reader called a `` series of dissolving views '' , he merges one period into another and gives a sense of continuous growth . But after 1832 , the narrative tends to lose its balanced , many-sided quality and to become a medley of topics , often unconnected by any single thread . Economic analysis was never Trevelyan's strong point and the England of the industrial transformation cries out for economic analysis . Yet after 1832 , the interrelations of economic and social and political affairs become blurred and the narrative becomes largely a conventional political account . Finally , the period after 1870 receives little attention and that quite superficial . Yet Britain In The Nineteenth Century became the vade mecum of beginning students of history , went through edition after edition , and continues to be reprinted up to the very present . Its success is a tribute , above all , to Trevelyan's brilliance as a literary stylist . In 1924 Trevelyan traveled to the United States , where he delivered the Lowell lectures at Harvard University . These lectures formed the nucleus of a general survey of English development which took form afterward as A History Of England . In short order , the general history became his most popular work and has remained , aside from his later Social history , the work most widely favored by the public . The History Of England has often been compared with Green's Short History . Like Green , Trevelyan aimed to write a history not of `` English kings or English conquests '' , but of the English people . The result was fortunate . The History takes too much for granted to serve as a text for other than English schoolboys , and like Britain in the nineteenth century it deteriorates badly as it goes beyond 1870 . Trevelyan's excursions into contemporary history were rarely happy ones . But as a stimulating , provocative interpretation of the broad sweep of English development it is incomparable . Living pictures of the early boroughs , country life in Tudor and Stuart times , the impact of the industrial revolution compete with sensitive surveys of language and literature , the common law , parliamentary development . The strength of the History is also its weakness . Trevelyan is militantly sure of the superiority of English institutions and character over those of other peoples . His nationalism was not a new characteristic , but its self-consciousness , even its self-satisfaction , is more obvious in a book that stretches over the long reach of English history . And yet the elements which capture his liberal and humanistic imagination are those which make the English story worth telling and worth remembering . Tolerance and compromise , social justice and civil liberty , are today too often in short supply for one to be overly critical of Trevelyan's emphasis on their central place in the English tradition . Like most major works of synthesis , The History Of England is informed by the positive views of a first-class mind , and this is surely a major work . Four years after the publication of The History Of England , the first volume of Trevelyan's Queen Anne trilogy appeared . By now he had become Regius Professor of Modern History at Cambridge and had been honored by the award of the Order of Merit . His academic duties had little evident effect on his prolific pen . Blenheim was followed in rapid succession by Ramillies And The Union With Scotland and by The Peace And The Protestant Succession , the three forming together a detailed picture of England under Queen Anne . Like his volume on Wycliffe , the work was accompanied by the publication of a selected group of documents , in this case illustrative of the history of Queen Anne's reign down to 1707 . Trevelyan was at least in part attracted to the period by an almost unconscious desire to take up the story where Macaulay's History Of England had broken off . In addition , he believed in the `` dramatic unity and separateness of the period from 1702-14 , lying between the Stuart and Hanoverian eras with a special ethos of its own '' . He saw the age as one in which Britain `` settled her free constitution '' and attained her modern place in the world . To most observers , there is little doubt that he placed an artificial strait jacket of unity upon the years of Anne's reign which in reality existed only in the pages of his history . Of the three volumes , Blenheim is easily the best . In four opening chapters reminiscent of Macaulay's famous third chapter , Trevelyan surveys the state of England at the opening of the eighteenth century . His delightful picture of society and institutions is filled with warm detail that brings the period vividly to life . He tends to underestimate -- or perhaps to view charitably -- the brutality and the violence of the age , so that there is an idyllic quality in these pages which hazes over some of its sharp reality . Yet as an evocation of time past , there are few such successful portraits in English historical literature . Once the scene is set , Trevelyan skilfully builds up the tense story until it reaches its climax in the dramatic victory of Marlborough and Eugene of Savoy at Blenheim . The account of the battle is , next to his descriptions of Garibaldi's campaigns , Trevelyan's outstanding military narrative . The scene is etched in sharp detail , the military problems brilliantly explained , and the excitement and importance of the battle made evident . If only for this modest masterpiece of military history , Blenheim is likely to be read and reread long after newer interpretations have perhaps altered our picture of the Marlborough wars . Ramillies And The Union With Scotland has fewer high spots than Blenheim and much less of its dramatic unity . Yet in several chapters on Scotland in the eighteenth century , Trevelyan copes persuasively with the tangled confusion of Scottish politics against a vivid background of Scottish religion , customs , and traditions . I stood on a table , surrounded by hundreds of expectant young faces . Questions came to me from all sides about my world citizenship activities . After making a short statement about human rights , and the freedom to travel , I told them I would be going to the Kehl bridge the next morning in order to cross the Rhine into Germany . `` May we come with you '' ? ? Called out a dozen young voices . `` Well , I might not get that far '' , I told them , `` as actually I have no papers to enter Germany and , as a matter of fact , no permit to return to France once I leave '' . That was all they needed . They would champion me . We would all meet at ten o'clock at the Kehl bridge , five miles from Strasbourg , and march triumphantly across into Germany . There was only one hitch : the small town of Kehl , on the other side of the Rhine , was still under French jurisdiction . The real Franco-German frontier was beyond the town's limits . In fact , all persons were permitted to cross the Rhine into Kehl , there being no sentry posted on the west side of the river . That evening , as I learned later , the students , enjoying that spontaneous immodesty in action known only to university students , surged out onto the streets of Strasbourg , overturning empty streetcars , marking up store fronts , and shouting imprudently , `` Garry Davis to power '' ! ! As I got off the trolley at Kehl bridge the next morning , I was met by what looked like 5,000 students , some of whom were carrying sticks apparently for the coming `` battle '' with the police . Alarmed by this display of weapons , I looked toward the bridge and there saw , stretched across the near side , a cordon of policemen , their bicycles forming a roadblock before which stood several French officers in uniform and a small waspish man in a brown derby . `` Listen please '' , I called to the students in French . `` I thank you most heartily for being here . This is full evidence of your support for my principles . These principles , however , will not be served by violence in any form . If they are right , they will prevail of and by themselves . I ask you all to support me in this . If one finger is raised against the authorities , all our moral power will vanish . Your self-control in this respect will be the only witness to your understanding of what I am saying . I have full confidence in you . Now , let's go '' . I marched up to the waiting officials , the students massed behind me . As usual , the press photographers were on hand . The waspish man stopped me three paces from the bicycle barricade , and asked me in French if I had papers to leave France . I replied in the affirmative , taking out my recently acquired titre d'identite et de voyage , on which was stamped a permission to leave France . He examined it carefully , handed it back and said , `` Eh bien , you may leave France '' . I took one step eastward . One of the uniformed officers stepped in my way , demanding to know whether I had permission to enter Germany . `` No , I have no permission to enter Germany '' , I told him . `` Alors , you may go no farther '' , he said imperiously . `` Is this then the frontier '' ? ? I asked him . `` Yes '' . At this , the students let out a yell , knowing full well the actual frontier was beyond the town of Kehl . `` But I have no permission to re-enter France , and I have just left '' , I told him . `` I must then be standing on the line between France and Germany '' . The waspish man stepped forward . `` Line ? ? Line ? ? But there is no line between France and Germany , that is , no actual line . I mean '' `` No line '' ? ? I asked . `` But if there is no line , how can there be two countries ? ? You have just given me permission to leave France , which I did . I have witnesses . And as you know , I have no permission to re-enter France once out . Now I learn I cannot enter Germany . Obviously I'm stuck on the line between the two countries '' . The students were laughing uproariously at this piece of logic , and even the policemen were trying hard not to smile . `` Mais non '' , the Interior Ministry man coaxed , `` you may come back to Strasbourg , now , if you wish '' . `` Oh ? ? Then will you give me a visa to re-enter France '' ? ? `` Visa ? ? But there is no question of a visa . You are still in France '' . `` Ah , then please tell me where the frontier is because this gentleman here '' -- I indicated the French occupation officer -- `` informs me that Germany is just on the other side of him '' . The Interior man looked uneasily at his French compatriot . From the crowd were coming cries of `` He's right '' ! ! `` There must be a line '' ! ! And `` Bravo , Garry , continue '' ! ! Seeing their hesitation , I said , `` Well , until I have permission to enter Germany , or a visa to re-enter France , I shall be obliged to remain here on the line between two countries '' , whereupon I moved to the side of the road , parked my backpack against the small guardhouse on the sidewalk , sat down , took out my typewriter , and began typing the above conversation . The reporters were questioning the Interior man and the French officer , both of whom remained noncommittal as to what action , if any , would be taken in my regard . Finally they went off to file their stories , after the photographers had taken pictures of my latest vigil . The students crowded around asking questions , slapping me on the back , and generally being friendly . `` But what will you do this evening , Mr. Davis '' ? ? Asked a young mustached Frenchman . `` It will be very cold '' . `` I don't know '' , I told him , `` except that I will be here '' . `` I shall see about getting you a tent '' , he said . `` I have a small sports shop in Strasbourg '' . That would be a great help , I told him , thanking him for his thoughtfulness . A special guard was posted at my end of the bridge to make sure I didn't cross , the ludicrousness of the situation being revealed fully in that everyone else -- men , women , and children , dogs , cats , horses , cars , trucks , baby carriages -- could cross Kehl bridge into Kehl without surveillance . The day passed eventfully enough , with a constant stream of visitors , some stopping only to say hello , others getting into serious conversations , such as one Andre Fuchs , a free-lance journalist from Strasbourg who wrote an article for the Nouvelle Alsatian in highly sympathetic terms . Some students from the University returned around six with a large pot containing enough hot soup to last me a week . A volunteer food brigade had been arranged , they told me , which would supply me with the necessities as long as I remained at the bridge . A little later , the sports shop man returned with a small pup tent . One of the girl students , sitting by while I ate the thick soup , asked me if I had a sleeping bag . When I informed her that I didn't , she said she would borrow her brother's and bring it to me later that evening . `` You do not know me '' , she said in good English , `` but my mother was your governess in Philadelphia when you were a child '' . Her name was Esther Peter . I was delighted to make that personal contact in such trying and unusual circumstances . The Peter family proved wonderful and helpful friends in the following days , Mrs. Peter , little Esther , and Raoul , who generously lent me his sleeping bag for my `` Watch on the Rhine '' . Sighting a line from the bridge to a small field directly to the side , I pitched the tent that evening on the stateless `` line '' , digging a small trench around it as best I could with a toy spade donated by a neighborhood child . The wind from the Rhine was damp and chill , necessitating a fire for warmth . After scouring around a bit in the open area , I came across what proved to be tar-soaked logs which crackled and burned brightly , giving off vast rolls of smoke into the ashen sky . Each evening the students appeared with the soup kettle and several petits pains , Esther usually being among them . I had advised friends to write me to `` No Man's Land , Pont Kehl , Between Strasbourg and Kehl , France-Germany '' . Sure enough , mail began trickling in , delivered by a talkative , highly amused French postman who informed me there had been quite a debate at the post office as to whether that address would be recognized . On Christmas Eve , students brought out two small Christmas trees which I placed on either side of the tent . As the field on which my tent was pitched was a favorite natural playground for the kids of the neighborhood , I had made many friends among them , taking part in their after-school games and trying desperately to translate Grimm's Fairy Tales into an understandable French as we gathered around the fire in front of the tent . To my great surprise and delight , when they saw the two trees they went rushing off , returning shortly with decorations from their own trees . It was a merry if somewhat soggy Christmas for me that year . In the mail were invitations to speak at the universities of Cologne , Heidelberg , and Baden-Baden . Twenty thousand world citizens at Stuttgart had signed a petition inviting me to visit their town . When Dr. Adenauer was approached by a world citizen delegation to find out his disposition of my case , he gave them his personal approval of my entry , saying that all men advocating peace should be welcomed into Germany . The special guard , however , was still posted on Kehl bridge . As it began raining at around eight o'clock on December 26th , I retired into my tent early , somewhat tired and discouraged , my body reacting sluggishly because of the continued exposure . No matter how large the fire , I couldn't seem to shake off the chill that day . `` Oh , Mr. Davis , are you there '' ? ? A voice drifted in to me above the patter of the rain shortly after I had fallen into a fitful sleep . `` Who is it '' ? ? `` We're from the Council of Europe , British delegation . May we have a word with you '' ? ? `` I'm sorry . I've had a trying day and I just can't make it out again '' , I told them . I heard nothing more . Later I learned that Sir Hugh Dalton had expressed a desire to see me , hence their trip to `` No Man's Land '' . On the evening of December 27th , Esther noticed my pallid look and rasping voice . She entreated me to see a doctor , and when I refused , brought one out to see me . He advised immediate hospitalization . I wouldn't hear of it because it meant giving up the `` line '' , though I realized I was in poor shape physically . Esther , mistaking my hesitation , assured me that the hospital expense would be taken care of by a leading merchant in Strasbourg whom she had already approached . `` No , it's not that '' , I told her . `` You see , once I relinquish the position I've already established here , I couldn't regain it without sacrificing the logic of it '' . At that moment , up walked a tall young man with glasses who announced himself as a world citizen from Basel , Switzerland . Without preliminaries , Esther asked him , `` If you are a world citizen , will you take Garry Davis' place in his tent while he goes to the hospital '' ? ? `` But of course , with pleasure '' , he replied . Esther looked at me . I looked from her to him . `` What is your name '' ? ? I asked him . `` Jean Babel '' . `` Shake '' , I said . `` You have just enlisted for the ' Rhine Campaign ' '' . Esther jumped up , ran to him and gave him a little hug . `` I am so happy . Now come , Garry , we must go quickly . There is a police car outside . Maybe they will take us '' . Such were the incongruities of the situation that the very police assigned to check up on me were drafted into driving me to the Strasbourg Hospital while World Citizen Jean Babel waved adieu from the `` Line '' ! ! He remembered every detail of his pre-assault movements but nothing of the final , desperate rush to come to grips with the enemy . When the victory cheer went up this officer found himself still mounted , with his horse pressed broadside against Cleburne's log parapet in a tangled group of infantrymen . His hat was gone , the tears were streaming from his eyes . He never knew how he got there . Six climactic minutes in an individual's life left no memory . Eight hundred and sixty-five Rebels surrendered within their works and a thousand more were captured or surrendered themselves that night and the next day . Eight field guns were captured in position . Seven battle flags and fourteen officers' swords were sent to Thomas' headquarters . It was the only sizable assault upon infantry and artillery behind breastworks successfully made by either side during the Atlanta campaign . The Fourteenth Regiment of Ohio Volunteers lost one-third of its numbers within a few minutes , among them being several men whose time of service had expired but who had volunteered to advance with their regiment . The Thirty-eighth Regiment of Ohio Volunteers , one of the regiments in Thomas' First Division during Buell's command , suffered its greatest loss of the war in this action . A popular belief grew up after the war that the only time during the Civil War that Thomas ever put his horse to a gallop was when he went to hurry up Stanley for this assault . Sherman was responsible for the story when he said in his memoirs that this was the only time he could recall seeing Thomas ride so fast . While Thomas' injured back led him to restrain his mount from its most violent gait he moved quickly enough when he had to . It is not in the record , but he must have galloped his horse at Peach Tree Creek when he brought up Ward's guns to save Newton's crumbling line . While the final combat of the campaign was being worked out at Jonesborough , Thomas , on Sherman's instructions , ordered Slocum , now commanding the Twentieth Corps , to make an effort to occupy Atlanta if he could do so without exposing his bridgehead to a counterattack . The dispatch must have been sent after sundown on September 1 . Slocum made his reconnaissanace the next morning , found the town empty , accepted the surrender of the mayor and occupied the city a little before noon . On the morning of September 2 the Fourth Corps and the Armies of the Tennessee and the Ohio followed the line of Hardee's retreat . About noon they came up with the enemy two miles from Lovejoy's Station and deployed . The Fourth Corps assaulted and carried a small portion of the enemy works but could not hold possession of the gain for want of cooperation from the balance of the line . That night a note written in Slocum's hand and dated from inside the captured city came to Sherman stating that the Twentieth Corps was in possession of Atlanta . Before making the news public Sherman sent an officer with the note to Thomas . In a short time the officer returned and Thomas followed on his heels . The cautious Thomas re-examined the note and then , making up his mind that it was genuine , snapped his fingers , whistled and almost danced in his exuberance . The next day Sherman issued his orders ending the campaign and pulled his armies back to Atlanta . The measure of combat efficiency in an indecisive campaign is a matter of personal choice . Sherman laid great store by place captures . Hood refused to notice anything except captured guns and colors . By both standards Thomas had the right to be proud . Thomas thanked his men for their tenacity of purpose , unmurmuring endurance , cheerful obedience , brilliant heroism and high qualities in battle . Sherman felt that his own part in the campaign was skillful and well executed but that the slowness of a part of his army robbed him of the larger fruits of victory . He supposed the military world would approve of his accomplishment . Whatever the military world thought , the political world approved it wholeheartedly . For some time , despondency in some Northern quarters had been displayed in two ways -- an eagerness for peace and a dissatisfaction with Lincoln . Proposals were in the air for a year's armistice . Lincoln was sure that he would not be re-elected . In the midst of this gloom , at 10:05 P.M. on September 2 , Slocum's telegram to Stanton , `` General Sherman has taken Atlanta '' , shattered the talk of a negotiated peace and boosted Lincoln into the White House . To the Republicans no victory could have been more complete . Official congratulations showered upon Sherman and his army . Lincoln mentioned their distinguished ability , courage and perseverance . He felt that this campaign would be famous in the annals of war . Grant called it prompt , skillful and brilliant . Halleck described it as the most brilliant of the war . Actually the Atlanta campaign was a military failure . Next best to destroying an army is to deprive it of its freedom of action . Sherman had accomplished this much of his job and then inexplicably nullified it by his thirty-mile retreat from Lovejoy's to Atlanta . But , so far as its territorial objectives were concerned , the campaign was successful . Within the narrow frame of military tactics , too , the experts agree that the campaign was brilliant . In seventeen weeks the military front was driven southward more than 100 miles . There was a battle on an average of once every three weeks . The skirmishing was almost constant . In the summary of the principal events of the campaign compiled from the official records there are only ten days which show no fighting . The casualties in the Army of the Cumberland were 22,807 , while for all three armies they were 37,081 . Men were killed in their camps , at their meals and in their sleep . Rifle fire often kept the opposing gunners from manning their pieces . Modern warfare was born in this campaign -- periscopes , camouflage , booby traps , land mines , extended order , trench raids , foxholes , armored cars , night attacks , flares , sharpshooters in trees , interlaced vines and treetops , which were the forerunners of barbed wire , trip wires to thwart a cavalry charge , which presaged the mine trap , and the general use of anesthetics . The use of map coordinates was begun when the senior officers began to select tactical points by designating a spot as `` near the letter o in the word mountain '' . A few weeks later the maps were being divided into squares and a position was described as being `` about lots 239 , 247 and 272 with pickets forward as far as 196 '' . This system was dependent upon identical maps and Thomas supplied them from a mobile lithograph press . Orders of the day began to specify the standard map for the movement . Sherman proved that a railway base could be movable and the most brilliant feature of the Atlanta campaign was the rapid repair of the tracks . To the Rebels it seemed as if Sherman carried tunnels and bridges in his pockets . The whistle of Sherman's locomotives often drowned out the rattle of the skirmish fire . As always , the ranks worked out new and better tactics , but there was brilliance in the way the field commands adopted these methods and in the way the army commanders incorporated them into their military thinking . The fossilized , formalized , precedent-based thinking of the legendary military brain was not evident in Sherman's armies . Sherman could never be accused of sticking too long with the old . One of Sherman's most serious shortcomings , however , was his mistrust of his cavalry . He never saw that it was a complement to his infantry and not a substitute for it . Then , in some way , this lack of faith in the cavalry became mixed up in his mind with the dragging effect of wagon trains and was hardened into a prejudice . A horse needed twenty pounds of food a day but the infantryman got along with two pounds . The horseman required eleven times more than the footman . So Sherman tried a compromise . He would ship by rail five pounds per day per animal and the other fifteen pounds that were needed could be picked up off the country . It failed to work . Already debilitated by the Chattanooga starvation , the quality of Sherman's horseflesh ran downhill as the campaign progressed . Every recorded request by Thomas for a delay in a flank movement or an advance was to gain time to take care of his horses . Well led , properly organized cavalry , in its complementary role to infantry , had four functions . First , it could locate the enemy infantry , learn what they were doing , and hold them until the heavy foot columns could come up and take over . Second , it could screen its own infantry from the sight of the enemy . Third , it could threaten at all times , and destroy when possible , the enemy communications . It could reach key tactical points faster than infantry and destroy them or hold them as the case might be for the foot soldier . Its climactic role was to pursue and demoralize a defeated enemy but this chance never came in the Atlanta campaign . Thomas tried hard to have his cavalry ready for the test it was to meet , but his plans were wrecked when it was forced into a campaign without optimum mobility and with its commander stripped from it . Sherman knew the uses of cavalry as well as Thomas but he imagined a moving base with infantry wings instead of cavalry wings . His conception proved workable but slower and it enabled his enemy to make clean , deft , well organized retreats with small materiel losses . Sherman insisted that cavalry could not successfully break up hostile railways , yet Garrard's Covington raid and Rousseau's Opelika raid cut two-thirds of the rail lines he had to break and Sherman lived in mortal fear of what Forrest might do to his communications . When McPherson pushed blindly through Snake Creek Gap in a potentially decisive movement , the only cavalry in his van was the Ninth Illinois Mounted Infantry , totally inadequate for its role . It stumbled on infantry where no infantry should have been and McPherson's aggressive impulse faded out , overwhelmed by fears of the unknown . A proper cavalry command in his front would have developed the fact that he had run into one division of Polk's Army of the Mississippi moving up from the direction of Mobile to join Johnston at Dalton . From the night of August 30 to the morning of September 2 there was no Union cavalry east of the Macon railway to disclose to Sherman that he was missing the greatest opportunity of his career . A great part of the time , Thomas' infantry never knew the location of the enemy line . At such times Thomas wondered when and where a counterattack would strike him . It was the hard way to fight a war but Thomas did it without making any disastrous mistakes . Heat during the Atlanta campaign , coupled with unsuitable clothing , caused individual irritation that was compounded by a lack of opportunity to bathe and shift into clean clothing . To relieve the itch and sweat galls , the men got into the water whenever they could and since each sizable stream was generally the dividing line between the armies the pickets declared a private truce while the men went swimming . Johnston believed that Sherman put his naked engineers into the swimming parties to locate the various fords . Lieutenant Colonel James P. Brownlow , who commanded the First Brigade of Thomas' First Cavalry Division , was ordered across one of these fords . The water was deep and Brownlow took his troopers across naked -- except for guns , cartridge boxes and hats . They kicked their horses through the deep water with their bare heels , drove the Rebels out of their rifle pits and captured four men . Most of the Rebels got away since they could make better time through the stiff brush than their naked pursuers . Rank was becoming an explosive issue in all three of Sherman's armies . Merited recommendations from army commanders were passed over in favor of political appointees from civil life . In one of the very few letters in which he ever complained of Meynell , Thompson told Patmore of his distress at having had to leave London before this new friendship had developed further : `` That was a very absurd and annoying situation in which I was placed by W. M.'s curious methods of handling me . He never let me know that my visit was about to terminate until the actual morning I was to leave for Lymington . The result was that I found myself in the ridiculous position of having made a formal engagement by letter for the next week , only two days before my departure from London . Luckily both women knew my position and if anyone suffered in their opinion it was not I '' . It need hardly be remarked that Thompson was not generally known for his scrupulosity about keeping his social engagements , which makes his irritation in this letter all the more significant . When Thompson and her daughter began a correspondence which included fervent verses from Pantasaph , Mrs. King felt a proper Victorian alarm . Some , she knew , looked upon Thompson almost as a saint , but others read in `` The Hound Of Heaven '' what they took to be the confessions of a great sinner , who , like Oscar Wilde , had -- as one pious writer later put it -- thrown himself `` on the swelling wave of every passion '' . Consequently , on October 31 , 1896 , Mrs. King wrote to Thompson , quite against her daughter's wishes , asking him not to `` recommence a correspondence which I believe has been dropped for some weeks '' . Katherine was staying at a convent , and her mother felt that , as Thompson himself seems to have suggested , she might eventually stay there . This prospect did not please Mrs. King any more than did the possibility that her daughter might marry a Bohemian , but she used it to suggest to Thompson that , `` It is not in her nature to love you '' . For his part , Thompson had explained in a previous letter that there would be nothing but an honorable friendship between Katie and himself . At no time does he seem to have proposed marriage , and Mrs. King was evidently torn between a concern for her daughter's emotions and the desire to believe that the friendship might be continued without harm to her reputation . In any case , she told Thompson that she saw no reason why he might not see Katie again , `` now that this frank explanation has been made & no one can misunderstand '' . She ended her letter with the assurance that she considered his friendship for her daughter and herself to be an honor , from which she could not part `` without still more pain '' . After Thompson came to London to live , he received a letter from Katie , which was dated February 8 , 1897 . She regretted what she described as the `` unwarrantable & unnecessary '' check to their friendship and said that she felt that they understood one another perfectly . This letter concluded with an invitation : `` I am a great deal at the little children's Hospital . Mr. Meynell knows the way . I know you are very busy now , you are writing a great deal & your book is coming out , isn't it ? ? But if you are able & care to come , you know how glad I shall be . Ever yours sincerely , Katherine Douglas King '' The invitation was accepted and other letters followed , in which she spoke of her concern for his health and her delight in seeing him so much at home among the crippled children she served . It is difficult to say what Thompson expected would come of their relationship , which had begun so soon after his emotions had been stirred by Maggie Brien , but when Katie wrote on April 11 , 1900 , to tell him that she was to be married to the Rev. Godfrey Burr , the vicar of Rushall in Staffordshire , the news evidently helped to deepen his discouragement over the failure of his hopes for a new volume of verse . In a letter to Meynell , which was written in June , less than a month before Katie's wedding , he was highly melodramatic in his despair and once again announced his intention of returning to the life of the streets : `` A week in arrears , and without means to pay , I must go , it is the only right thing . Perhaps Mrs. Meynell would do me the undeserved kindness to keep my own copy of the first edition of my first book , with all its mementos of her and the dear ones . Last , not least , there are some poems which K. King sent me ( addressed to herself ) when I was preparing a fresh volume , asking me to include them . The terrible blow of the New Year put an end to that project . I wish you would return them to her . I have not the heart . I never had the courage to look at them , when my projected volume became hopeless , fearing they were poor , until now when I was obliged to do so . O my genius , young and ripening , you would swear , -- when I wrote them ; ; and now ! ! What has it all come to ? ? All chance of fulfilling my destiny is over . I want you to be grandfather to these orphaned poems , dear father-brother , now I am gone ; ; and launch them on the world when their time comes . For them a box will be lodgment enough . Katie cannot mind your seeing them now ; ; since my silence must have ended when I gave the purposed volume to you . I ask you to do me the last favour of reading them by 8 to-morrow evening , about which time I shall come to say my sad good-bye . If you don't think much of them , tell me the wholesome truth . If otherwise , you will give me a pleasure . O Wilfrid ! ! It is strange ; ; but this -- yes , terrible step I am about to take is lightened with an inundating joy by the new-found hope that here , in these poems , is treasure -- or at least some measure of beauty , which I did not know of '' . Thompson , of course , was persuaded not to take the `` terrible step '' ; ; Meynell once again paid his debts and it was Katie , rather than Thompson , whose life was soon ended , for she died in childbirth in April , 1901 , in the first year of her marriage . The `` orphaned poems '' mentioned in the letter to Meynell comprised a group of five sonnets , which were published in the 1913 edition of Thompson's works under the heading `` Ad Amicam '' , plus certain other completed pieces and rough drafts gathered together in one of the familiar exercise books . The publication of Father Connolly's The Man Has Wings has made more of the group available in print so that a general picture of what it contained can now be had without difficulty . Some of the poems express a mood of joy in a newly discovered love ; ; others suggest its coming loss or describe the poet's feelings when he learns of a final separation . The somewhat Petrarchan love story which these poems suggest cannot obscure the fact that undoubtedly they have more than a little of autobiographical sincerity . When they were first written , there was evidently no thought of their being published , and those which refer to the writer's love for Mrs. Meynell particularly have the ring of truth . In `` My Song's Young Virgin Date '' , for example , Thompson wrote : `` Yea , she that had my song's young virgin date Not now , alas , that noble singular she , I nobler hold , though marred from her once state , Than others in their best integrity . My own stern hand has rent the ancient bond , And thereof shall the ending not have end : But not for me , that loved her , to be fond Lightly to please me with a newer friend Then hold it more than bravest-feathered song , That I affirm to thee , with heart of pride , I knew not what did to a friend belong Till I stood up , true friend , by thy true side ; ; Whose absence dearer comfort is , by far , Than presences of other women are '' ! ! Taking into account Thompson's capacity for self-dramatization and the possibility of a wish to identify his own life with the misfortunes of other poets who had known unhappy loves , there can be no doubt about his genuine emotion for Katie King . That she was affected by his protestations seems obvious , but since she was evidently a sensible young woman -- as well as an outgoing and sympathetic type -- it would seem that for her the word friendship had a far less intense emotional significance than that which Thompson gave it . From the outset , she must have realized that marriage with him was out of the question , and although she was displeased by the `` unwarrantable '' interference , it seems probable that she did agree with her mother's suggestion that the poet was `` perhaps '' a man `` most fitted to live & die solitary , & in the love only of the Highest Lover '' . The poems which were addressed to her , while they are far more restrained than those of `` Love In Dian's Lap '' , show no great technical advance over those of the `` Narrow Vessel '' group and are , if anything , somewhat more labored . Their interest remains chiefly biographical , for they throw some light on the utter despair which overtook Thompson in the spring and early summer of 1900 . Whether or not Danchin is correct in suggesting that Thompson's resumption of the opium habit also dates from this period is , of course , a matter of conjecture . Reid simply states , without offering any supporting evidence , that `` after he returned to London , he resumed his draughts of laudanum , and continued this right up to his death '' . There is every reason to recognize that in the very last years of his life , as we shall see , Thompson did take the drug in carefully rationed doses to ease the pains of his illness , but the exact date at which this began has never been determined . If , as Reid says , `` nearly all his poetry was produced when he was not taking opium '' , there may be some reason to doubt that he was under its influence in the period from 1896 to 1900 when he was writing the poems to Katie King and making plans for another book of verse . In any event , the critical productivity of that time is abundant proof that if he was taking laudanum , it was never in command of him to the extent that it had been during his vagrant years . Meynell's remedy for Thompson's despondent mood was typically practical . He simply found more work for him to do , and the articles and reviews continued without an evident break . 3 , As a reviewer , Thompson generally displayed a judicious attitude . That he read some of the books assigned to him with a studied carefulness is evident from his notes , which are often so full that they provide an unquestionable basis for the identification of reviews that were printed without his signature . On the basis of this careful reading , Thompson frequently gave a clear , complete , and interesting description of a prose work or chose effective quotations to illustrate his discussions of poetry . He was seldom an unmethodical critic , and his reviews generally followed a systematic pattern : a description of what the work contained , a treatment of the things that had especially interested him in it , and , wherever possible , a balancing of whatever artistic merits and faults he might have found . It was , of course , in this drawing of the balance sheet of judgment that he most clearly displayed his desire to do full justice to an author . Reviewing Davidson's The Testament Of An Empire Builder , for example , Thompson found that there was `` too much metrical dialectic '' . Poetry , he said , must be `` dogmatic '' : it must not stoop to argue like a `` K.C. in cloth-of-gold '' . Yet Davidson impressed him as a poet capable of `` sustained power , passion , or beauty '' , and he cited specific passages to illustrate not only these qualities but Davidson's command of imagery as well . Similarly , he wrote that Laurence Housman had a `` too deliberate manner '' as well as a lack of `` inevitable felicity in diction '' . But he admired Housman's `` subtle intellectuality '' and delighted in the inversion by which Divine Love becomes the most `` fatal '' allurement in `` Love The Tempter '' . Of course , there were books about which nothing good could be said . Understanding , as he did , the difficulty of the art of poetry , and believing that the `` only technical criticism worth having in poetry is that of poets '' , he felt obliged to insist upon his duty to be hard to please when it came to the review of a book of verse . As he had done on his first Imperial sortie a year and a half before , Lewis trekked southeast through Red Russia to Kamieniec . Thence he pushed farther south than he had ever been before into Podolia and Nogay Tartary or the Yedisan . There , along the east bank of the Southern Bug , opposite the hamlet of Zhitzhakli a few miles north of the Black Sea , he arrived at General Headquarters of the Russian Army . By June 19 , 1788 , he had presented himself to its Commander in Chief , the Governor of the Southern Provinces , the Director of the War College -- The Prince . Catherine's first war against the Grand Turk had ended in 1774 with a peace treaty quite favorable to her . By 1783 her legions had managed to annex the Crimea amid scenes of wanton cruelty and now , in this second combat with the Crescent , were aiming at suzerainty over all of the Black Sea's northern shoreline . Through most of 1787 operations on both sides had been lackadaisical ; ; those of 1788 were going to prove decisive , though many of their details are obscure . To consolidate what her Navy had won , the Czarina was fortunate that , for the first time in Russian history , her land forces enjoyed absolute unity of command under her favorite Giaour . Potemkin was directing this conflict on three fronts : in the Caucasus ; ; along the Danube and among the Carpathians , in alliance with the Emperor Joseph's armies ; ; and in the misty marshlands and shallow coastal waters of Nogay Tartary and Taurida , including the Crimean peninsula . Here the war would flame to its focus , and here Lewis Littlepage had come . Potemkin's Army of Ekaterinoslav , totaling , it was claimed , 40,000 regular troops and 6,000 irregulars of the Cossack Corps , had invested Islam's principal stronghold on the north shore of the Black Sea , the fortress town of Oczakov , and was preparing to test the Turk by land and sea . During a sojourn of slightly more than three months Chamberlain Littlepage could see action on both elements . As his second in command The Prince had Marshal Repnin , one-time Ambassador to Poland . Repnin , who had a rather narrow face , longish nose , high forehead , and arching brows , looked like a quizzical Mephistopheles . Some people thought he lacked both ability and character , but most agreed that he was noble in appearance and , for a Russian , humane . The Marshal came to know Littlepage quite well . At General Headquarters the newcomer in turn got to know others . There was the Neapolitan , Ribas , a capable conniver whose father had been a blacksmith but who had fawned his way up the ladder of Catherine's and Potemkin's favor till he was now a brigadier ( and would one day be the daggerman designated to do in Czar Paul 1 , , after traveling all the way to Naples to procure just the right stiletto ) . Then there were the distinguished foreign volunteers . Representing the Emperor were the Prince De Ligne , still as impetuous as a youth of twenty ; ; and General the Count Pallavicini , founder of the Austrian branch of that celebrated Italian house , a courtier Littlepage could have met at Madrid in December , 1780 . From Milan came the young Chevalier De Litta , an officer in the service of Malta . Out of Saxony rode the Prince of Anhalt-Bernburg , one of the Czarina's cousins and a lieutenant general in her armies , a frank , sensitive , popular soldier whose kindnesses Littlepage would `` always recall with the sincerest gratitude '' . Though Catherine was vexed at the number of French officers streaming to the Turkish standard , there were several under her own , such as the Prince De Nassau ; ; the energetic Parisian , Roger De Damas , three year's Littlepage's junior , to whom Nassau had taken a liking ; ; and the artillerist , Colonel Prevost , whom the Count De Segur had persuaded to lend his technical skills to Nassau . England contributed a young subaltern named Newton and the naval architect Samuel Bentham , brother to the economist , who for his colonel's commission was proving a godsend to the Russian fleet . From America were the Messrs. Littlepage and Jones . Lewis had expected to report at once to Jones's and Nassau's naval command post . On arrival at headquarters he had , however -- in King Stanislas' words to Glayre -- `` found such favor with Pe Potemkin that he made him his aide-de-camp and up to now does not want him to go join Paul Jones . '' So of course he stayed put . Having done so , he began to experience all the frustrations of others who attempted to get along with Serenissimus and do a job at the same time . The Prince's perceptions were quick and his energy monstrous , but these qualities were sapped by an Oriental lethargy and a policy of letting nothing interfere with personal passions . At headquarters -- sufficiently far from the firing line to make you forget occasionally that you were in a war -- Lewis found that the Commander in Chief's only desk was his knees ( and his only comb , his fingers ) . An entire theater had been set up for his diversion , with a 200-man Italian orchestra under the well-known Sarti . In the great one's personal quarters , a portable house , almost every evening saw an elegant banquet or reception . Lewis could let his eye caress The Prince's divan , covered with a rose-pink and silver Turkish cloth , or admire the lovely tapis , interwoven with gold , that spread across the floor . Filigreed perfume boxes exuded the aromas of Araby . Around the billiard tables were always at least a couple of dozen beribboned generals . At dinner the courses were carried in by tall cuirassiers in red capes and black fur caps topped with tufts of feathers , marching in pairs like guards from a stage tragedy . Among the visitors arriving every now and then there were , of course , women . For if Serenissimus made the sign of the Cross with his right hand , and meant it , with his left he beckoned lewdly to any lady who happened to catch his eye . Usually Lewis would find at headquarters one or more of The Prince's various nieces . Right now he found Sophie De Witt , that magnificent young matron he had spotted at Kamieniec four years ago . The Prince took her with him on every tour around the area , and it was rumored he was utilizing her knowledge of Constantinople as part of his espionage network . One evening he passed around the banquet table a crystal cup full of diamonds , requesting every female guest to select one as a souvenir . When a lady chanced to soil a pair of evening slippers , Brigadier Bauer was dispatched to Paris for replacements . But if The Prince fancied women and was fascinated by foreigners , he could be haughtiness personified to his subordinates . He had collared one of his generals in public . His coat trimmed in sable , diamond stars of the Orders of Saints Andrew or George agleam , he was often prone to sit sulkily , eye downcast , in a Scheherazade trance . When this happened , everything stopped . As Littlepage noted : `` A complete picture of Prince Potemkin may be had in his 1788 operations . He stays inactive for half the summer in front of Oczakov , a quite second-rate spot , begins to besiege it formally only during the autumn rains , and finally carries it by assault in the heart of winter . There's a man who never goes by the ordinary road but still arrives at his goal , who gratuitously gets himself into difficulty in order to get out of it with eclat , in a word a man who creates monsters for himself in order to appear a Hercules in destroying them '' . To help him do so The Prince had conferred control of his land forces on a soldier who was different from him in almost every respect save one : both were eccentrics of the purest ray serene . Alexander Vasilievitch Suvorov , now in his fifty-ninth year ( ten years Potemkin's senior ) , was a thin , worn-faced person of less than medium height who looked like a professor of botany . He had a small mouth with deep furrows on either side , a large flat nose , and penetrating blue eyes . His gray hair was thin , his face beginning to attract a swarm of wrinkles . He was ugly . But Suvorov's face was also a theater of vivacity , and his tough , stooping little frame was briskness embodied . Like all Russians he was an emotional man , and in him the emotions warred . Kind by nature , he never refused charity to a beggar or help to anyone who asked him for it ( as Lewis would one day discover ) . But he was perpetually engaged in a battle to command his own temper . When Littlepage was introduced , if the General behaved as usual , the newcomer faced a staccato salvo of queries : origin ? ? Age ? ? Mission ? ? Current status ? ? Woe betide the interviewee if he answered vaguely . Suvorov's contempt for don't-know's was proverbial ; ; better to give an asinine answer than none at all . Despising luxuries of any sort for a soldier , he slept on a pile of hay with his cloak as blanket . He rose at 4:00 A.M. the year round and was apt to stride through camp crowing like a cock to wake his men . His breakfast was tea ; ; his dinner fell anywhere from nine to noon ; ; his supper was nothing . He hadn't worn a watch or carried pocket money for years because he disliked both , but highest among his hates were looking glasses : he had snatched one from an officer's grasp and smashed it to smithereens . He kept several pet birds and liked cats well enough that if one crept by , he would mew at it in friendly fashion . Passing dogs were greeted with a cordial bark . Yet General Suvorov -- who had never forgotten hearing his adored Czarina declare that all truly great men had oddities -- was mad only north , northwest . He had come to learn that a reputation for peculiarity allowed mere field officers a certain leeway at Court ; ; in camp he knew it won you the affection of your men . He had accordingly cultivated eccentricity to the point of second nature . Underneath , he remained one of the best-educated Russians of his day . He dabbled in verse , could get along well among most of the European languages , and was fluent in French and German . He had also mastered the Cossack tongue . For those little men with the short whiskers , shaven polls , and top knots Suvorov reserved a special esteem . Potemkin -- as King Stanislas knew , and presently informed Littlepage -- looked on the Cossacks as geopolitical tools . To Serenissimus such tribes as the Cossacks of the Don or those ex-bandits the Zaporogian Cossacks ( in whose islands along the lower Dnieper the Polish novelist Sienkiewicz would one day place With Fire And Sword ) were just elements for enforced resettlement in , say , Bessarabia , where , as `` the faithful of the Black Sea borders '' , he could use their presence as bargaining points in the Czarina's territorial claims against Turkey . Suvorov saw in these scimitar-wielding skirmishers not demographic units but military men of a high potential . He knew how to channel their exuberant disorderliness so as to transform them from mere plunderers into A-1 guerrilla fighters . He always kept a few on his personal staff . He often donned their tribal costumes , such as the one featuring a tall , black sheepskin hat from the top of which dangled a little red bag ornamented by a chain of worsted lace and tassels ; ; broad red stripes down the trouser leg ; ; broader leather belt round the waist , holding cartridges and light sabre . Suvorov played parent not just to his Cossacks but to all his troops . It was probably at this period that Littlepage got his first good look at the ordinary Russian soldier . These illiterate boors conscripted from villages all across the Czarina's empire had , Suvorov may have told Lewis , just two things a commander could count on : physical fitness and personal courage . When their levies came shambling into camp , they were all elbows , hair , and beard . They emerged as interchangeable cogs in a faulty but formidable machine : shaved nearly naked , hair queued , greatcoated , jackbooted , and best of all -- in the opinion of the British professional , Major Semple-Lisle -- `` their minds are not estranged from the paths of obedience by those smatterings of knowledge which only serve to lead to insubordination and mutiny '' . Mando , pleading her cause , must have said that Dr. Brown was the most distinguished physician in the United States of America , for our man poured out his symptoms and drew a madly waving line indicating the irregularity of his pulse . `` He's got high blood pressure , too , and bum kidneys '' , the doctor said to me . `` Transparent look , waxy skin -- could well be uremia '' . He looked disapprovingly at an ash tray piled high with cigarette stubs , shook his head , and moved his hand back and forth in a strong negative gesture . The little official hung his head in shame . Seeing this , his colleague at the next desk gave a short , contemptuous laugh , pushed forward his own ash tray , innocent of a single butt , thumped his chest to show his excellent condition , and looked proud . The doctor gravely nodded approval . At this moment Mando came hurrying up to announce that the problem was solved and all Norton had to do was to sign a sheaf of papers . We went out of the office and down the hall to a window where documents and more officials awaited us , the rest of the office personnel hot upon our heels . By this time word had got around that an American doctor was on the premises . One fellow who had liver spots held out his hands to the great healer . It was funny but it was also touching . `` You know '' , Norton said to me later , `` I am thinking of setting up the Klinico Brownapopolus . I might not make any money but I'd sure have patients '' . After luncheon we took advantage of the siesta period to try to get in touch with a few people to whom our dear friend Deppy had written . Deppy is Despina Messinesi , a long-time member of the Vogue staff who , although born in Boston , was born there of Greek parents . Several years of her life have been spent in the homeland , and she had written to friends to alert them of our coming . `` All you have to do , Ilka dear , is to phone on your arrival . They are longing to see you '' . The wear and tear of life have taught me that very few friends of mutual friends long to see foreign strangers , but I planned on being the soul of tact , of giving them plenty of outs was there the tiniest implication that their cups were already running over without us . My diplomacy was needless . Greek phone service is worse than French , so that it was to be some little time before contact of any sort was established . In the late afternoon Mando came back to fetch us , and we drove to the Acropolis . We stopped first at the amphitheater that lies at the foot of the height crowned by the Parthenon . The curving benches are broken , chipped , tumbled , but still in place , as are the marble chairs , the seats of honor for the legislators . The carved statues of the frieze against the low wall are for the most part headless , but their exquisitely graceful nude and draped torsos and the kneeling Atlantes are well preserved in their perfect proportion . Having completed our camera work , we started our climb . I suppose the same emotion holds , if to a lesser degree , with any famous monument . Will it live up to its reputation ? ? The weight of fame and history is formidable , and dreary steel engravings in schoolbooks do little to quicken interest and imagination . Uh huh , we think , looking at them , so that's the Parthenon . And then perhaps one day we get to Athens . We are here ! ! We've come a long way and spent a lot of money . It had better be good . Don't worry about the Acropolis . It is awe-inspiring . Probably every visitor has a favorite time for his first sight of it . We saw it frequently afterward , but our suggestion for the very first encounter is near sunset . The light at that time is a benediction . The serene , majestic columns of the Parthenon , tawny in color against the pure deep blue sky , frame incredible vistas . All we wanted to do was to stand very quietly and look and look and look . More than twenty-four hundred years old , bruised , battered , worn and partially destroyed , combining to an astounding degree solidity and grace , it still stands , incomparable testimony to man's aspiration . In 1687 the Turks , who had been in control of the city since the fifteenth century , with a truly shattering lack of prudence used the Parthenon as a powder magazine . It was hit by a shell fired by the bombarding Venetian army and the great central portion of the temple was blown to smithereens . Nearby is the temple of Athena . The architectural feature , the caryatides upholding the portico , famous around the world as the Porch of the Maidens , was referred to airily by Mando as the Girls' Place . Another beautiful building is the Propylaea , the entrance gate of the Acropolis . My other nugget of art and architectural knowledge -- besides remembering that it was Ghiberti who designed the doors of the baptistery in Florence -- is the three styles of Greek columns . For some happy reason Doric , Ionic , and Corinthian have always stuck in my mind . Furthermore I can identify each design . It remained , however , for Mando to teach me that Doric symbolized strength , Ionic wisdom , and Corinthian beauty , the three pillars of the ancient world . The columns of the Parthenon are fluted Doric . Another classic sight that gave us considerable pleasure was the Evzone sentry , in his ballet skirt with great pompons on his shoes , who was patrolling up and down in front of the palace . Gun on shoulder , he would march smartly for a few yards , bring his heels together with a click , make a brisk pirouette , skirts flaring , and march back to his point of departure . We did not dare speak to so exalted a being , but Norton aimed his camera and shot him , so to speak , on the rise , the split second between the halt and the turn . The evening of our first day we drove with Christopher and Judy Sakellariadis , who were friends and patients of Norton , to dine at a restaurant on the shores of the Aegean . On the way out Mr. Sakellariadis detoured up a special hill from which one may obtain a matchless view of the Acropolis lighted by night . The great spectacle was a source of rancor , and Son et Lumiere , which the French were trying to promote with the Athenians , was the reason . These performances were being staged at historical monuments throughout Europe . By a combination of music , lighting effects , and narration , famous events that have transpired in these locations are evoked and re-created for large audiences usually to considerable acclaim . The Acropolis had been scheduled for the treatment too , but apparently it was to take place at the time of the full moon when the Athenians themselves , out of respect for the natural beauty of the occasion , were wont to forgo their own usual nocturnal illumination . Athenian society was split into two factions , the Philistines and the Artists . The Artists contended that the Philistines , gross of soul , were all for having Son et Lumiere , since the French were footing the bill and the attraction , wherever it had been done , had proven popular . This was the crassest kind of materialism and they , the Artists , would have no truck with it . The Acropolis was unique in the world and if that imcomparable work flooded by moonlight wasn't enough for both natives and tourists , then they were quite simply barbarians and the hell with them . It was very stimulating . The restaurant to which the Sakellariadises took us on this night of controversy was the Asteria , on Asteria beach . This is a public bathing beach , easily accessible by tramway from the center of Athens . Office workers frequently go out there to lunch and swim during the siesta period , which , during the summer , lasts from two until five in the afternoon , when shops and offices are again open for business . They close sometime after eight . Nine o'clock is the rush hour , when the busses are jammed , and by nine-thirty the restaurants are beginning to fill . Bedtime is late , for the balmy evenings are delightful and everyone wants to linger under the stars . The sand is fine and pleasant , the cabanas are clean , and the parasols , green , raspberry , and butter yellow , are very gay . Although open to the general public it is not overcrowded ; ; the atmosphere is that of an attractive private beach club at home . We went there a couple of times to swim and enjoyed ourselves thoroughly . This agreeable state of affairs is explicable , I think , on two counts . One is Greece is not yet suffering from overpopulation . The public may still find pleasure in public places . The other is that the charge for cabanas and parasols , though modest from an American point of view , still is a little high for many Athenians . We were struck by the notable absence of banana skins and beer cans , but just so that we wouldn't go overboard on Greek refinement , perfection was side-stepped by a couple of braying portable radios . Greek boys and girls also go for rock-and-roll , and the stations most tuned to are those carrying United States overseas programs . A good deal of English was spoken on the beach , most educated Greeks learn it in childhood , and there were also American wives and children of our overseas servicemen . For a delightful drive out of Athens I should recommend Sounion , at the end of the Attic Peninsula . The road , a comparatively new one , is very good , winding along inlets , coves , and bays of deep and brilliant blue . I suppose the day will inevitably come when the area will be encrusted with developments , but at present it is deserted and seductive . Three beneficial hurdles to progress are the lack of water , electricity , and telephones . At Sounion there is a group of beautiful columns , the ruins of a temple to Poseidon , of particular interest at that time , as active reconstruction was in progress . Gaunt scaffoldings adjoined the ruins , and on the ground segments of columns two and a half to three feet in thickness were being fitted with sections cunningly chiseled to match exactly the fluting and proportion of the original . Later they would be hoisted into place . There is a mediocre restaurant at Sounion and I fed a thin little Grecian cat and gave it two saucers of water -- there was no milk -- which it lapped up as though it were nectar . I think its thirst had never been assuaged before . Norton and I dined one night in a sea-food restaurant in Piraeus right on the water's edge . To enter it , you go down five or six steps from the road . Across the road is the kitchen , and waiters bearing great trays of dishes dodge traffic as nimbly as their French colleagues at the restaurant in the Place Du Tertre in Paris . This restaurant , too , had a cat , a dusty , thin little creature . How can a cat be thin in a fish restaurant ? ? But this one was . When offered a morsel it glanced right and left and winced , obviously frightened and expecting a kick , but too hungry not to snatch the tidbit . Greece was one of the highlights of our trip , but beginning in Greece and continuing around the world throughout Southeast Asia the treatment of animals was horrifying , ranging from callous indifference to active cruelty . This of course was not true of the educated and sophisticated people we met , who loved their pets , but kindness is not a basic human instinct . We met some charming Athenians , and among them our chauffeur Panyotis ranked high . His English was limited , and the little he knew he found irritating . A particularly galling phrase was `` O.K. , Panyotis , we have time at our disposal '' . This he claimed was the favorite refrain of the English . They would be lolling under a tree sipping Ouzo , relishing the leisurely life , assuring him that the day was yet young . `` Let him become honest , and they discard him . -- But let him be ready to invent whatever falsehood -- to assail whatever character -- and to prostitute his paper to whatever ends -- and they hug him to their heart . In proportion to the degradation of his moral worth , is the increase of his worth to them '' . To exonerate the legislature and thereby extricate himself from a sticky situation , Pike took another course and made it appear that the legislature had been bilked . He claimed in his attacks that Woodruff , with scurrilous underhandedness , had deliberately written an ambiguous bid that had so confused the honest members of the legislature that they had awarded him the contract without knowing what they were doing . The charge was so farfetched that Woodruff paid little attention to it , and answered Pike in a rather bored way , wearily declaring that a `` new hand '' was pumping the bellows of the Crittenden organ , and concluding : `` In a controversy with an adversary so utterly destitute of moral principles , even a triumph would entitle the victor to no laurels . The game is not worth the ammunition it would cost . We therefore leave the writer to the enjoyment of the unenvied reputation which the personal abuse he has heaped on us will entitle him to from the low and vulgar herd to which he belongs '' . Despite Woodruff's continuing refusal to debate with Pike through the columns of his newspaper , Pike did not let up his attack for a moment . Over the months he became a political gadfly with an incessant barrage of satirical poems ridiculing Woodruff , the `` Casca '' letters belittling Woodruff , and long analytical articles vilifying Woodruff . So persistent were these attacks that in March of the following year , Woodruff was finally moved to action , and Pike was to learn his first lesson in frontier politics , the subtle art of diversion . To attack Pike directly would gain Woodruff little , for as a penniless newcomer Pike had nothing to lose . By this time Woodruff had accurately measured Pike as a man of great personal pride , a man who would fly into a towering rage if his integrity were questioned , and who would be anxious to avenge himself . Pike's honor would now come under attack , but not by Woodruff himself . The charges would be made in The Gazette by an anonymous correspondent , and Pike would be so busy trying to track down the illusive character assassin that he would forget about harassing Woodruff . The strategy worked perfectly . Pike was stunned by the first blast against his character , which was published in the March 4th issue of The Gazette under the name `` Vale '' . The anonymous correspondent did not resort to innuendoes . He called Pike a thief . He said Pike had stolen mules from Harris during the Santa Fe expedition ; ; he accused Pike of continuing his sticky-fingered career in Arkansas with the theft of some otter skins in Van Buren . The charges caught Pike off balance , coming as they did from an unexpected quarter . Outraged , he used the Advocate of March 7th for a denial , sending immediately to Santa Fe and Van Buren for documents to vindicate himself , and demanding that Woodruff reveal the name of this perfidious slanderer who disguised himself under a pastoral pseudonym . Woodruff said nothing , and Pike , frustrated , stormed throughout Little Rock in an unsuccessful search for `` Vale '' , asking his friends to keep their ears open . Finally he learned through the grapevine that the culprit might be one James W. Robinson in Pope County . Without further inquiry , Pike jumped to the conclusion that Robinson was guilty , and , following the honorable route that would eventually lead to the dueling ground , sent a message to Robinson through his friends , demanding that he either confirm or deny his complicity . Robinson did neither . To Pike , silence was tantamount to an admission of guilt , and he determined to get Robinson onto the dueling ground at all costs . On April 11th he wrote an open letter in The Advocate , making it known `` to the world that Jas. W. Robinson is by his own admission a base liar and a slanderer '' . If Robinson was a liar and a slanderer , he was also a very canny gentleman , for nothing that Pike could do would pry so much as a single word out of him . Preoccupied with his own defense and his attempts to get Robinson to fight , Pike lessened his attacks on Woodruff , and finally stopped them altogether . And Pike never did find out if Robinson was really responsible for the `` Vale '' letter . Woodruff's strategy had been immensely successful . It took Pike a long time to realize what Woodruff had done , and it had a profound effect on him . Once he learned a lesson , he never forgot it . In the next few months of comparative silence , Pike waited patiently until conditions were perfect for a new attack , and then , displaying a remarkable grasp of the subtleties of political infighting , gained from his first bout with Woodruff , he used these changed conditions to excellent advantage . Shortly after the `` Vale '' incident , a rift began to develop between William Woodruff and Governor Pope . One-armed , gruff , frugally honest , Governor Pope had been the ideal man to assume office in Arkansas after the disgraceful antics of political bosses like Crittenden , and he ruled the state with an iron fist , tolerating no nonsense . Woodruff had supported him all the way , both as a chief executive and as a man . Besides being political allies , they were also friends . This warm relationship came to an abrupt end in June of 1834 when the National Congress appropriated $3,000 for compiling and printing the laws of Arkansas Territory , and , taking note of the recent wave of corruption in the legislature , left it to the governor to award the contract . Woodruff wanted this political windfall very badly , and everyone assumed that he would get it because he was a close friend of the governor and his stanchest supporter . After all , Woodruff owned a competent printing plant and was the logical man for the job . But because the governor was determined that friendship should not influence him one way or the other , he looked for a printer with a knowledge of the law ( which Woodruff did not have ) , and awarded the contract to a lawyer named John Steele who had started a newspaper in Helena the year before . Woodruff was furious . Considering the governor's act a personal rebuff , he aired his feelings in The Gazette on August 26 , 1834 : : `` We think the governor treated us rather shabbily , to say the least of it . It is but justice to Mr. Steele for us to add that , in the above remarks , nothing is intended to his disparagement , either as a lawyer or as a printer . He got a good fat job and we congratulate him on his good luck . We hope that he will execute it in a manner that will entitle him to credit '' . As summer cooled into fall and winter , even so the relationship between the two men continued to grow colder by the day , and by December of 1834 it was icy . It was at this point that Pike decided to capitalize on the bad feelings between the two men . The eventual prize in this new battle was the public printing contract that Woodruff still held . From his first bout with the canny Woodruff , Pike had learned that it was better not to attack him directly , so , harping on the theme that the cost of printing was too high , he condemned the governor for permitting such a state of affairs to exist . To document his charge , Pike set up two parallel columns in The Advocate showing the price charged by The Gazette and the considerably lower price for which the work could be done elsewhere . Then he called on the governor to explain why . The governor was not used to having his integrity questioned , and he promptly passed the charges on to Woodruff , demanding that Woodruff answer them . If Woodruff could not furnish a strong explanation , the governor insisted that he lower his prices in accord with the scale printed in The Advocate . Woodruff was now impaled on the horns of a dilemma . As a proud man , his prestige would suffer if he let Pike dictate to him through the governor's office , but to lower his prices would be tantamount to an admission that they had been too high in the first place . As a consequence , he did neither . Very angry at Woodruff , the governor used his personal influence to have the printing contract withdrawn from The Gazette and awarded to the lowest bidder , which , by a strange coincidence , happened to be Pike's Advocate . And , for the moment at least , the governor now found himself allied with the head of the Crittenden faction he had formerly opposed , and Pike was credited with a clear triumph over Woodruff . But in the confused atmosphere of frontier politics , alliances were as quickly broken as they were formed , and as Pike came to favor with the governor of the Territory , the governor fell out of favor with the President of the United States . On January 28 , 1835 , Andrew Jackson removed Pope from office and elevated Territorial Secretary William S. Fulton to the position . Fulton was a very close friend of Jackson , and had been his private secretary for a number of years in the old days . As a stanch party man and a rabid Democrat , he had little tolerance for Whigs like Pike , and Pike lost any immediate personal advantage his victory over Woodruff might have gained him . 2 ; ; as Pike proved himself adept in the political arena , he also became a social lion in the village of Little Rock , where he served as a symbol of the culture that the ladies of the town were striving so eagerly to cultivate . After all , Pike was an established poet and his work had been published in the respectable periodicals of that center of American culture , Boston . His accomplishments , and the fact that he was resident , did much to offset the unkind words travelers used to describe Little Rock after a visit there . For some reason , none of them were impressed with the territorial capital . The internationally known sportsman and traveler Friedrich Gerstacker was typical of its detractors in the mid-thirties . `` Little Rock is a vile , detestable place . '' He wrote . `` Little Rock is , without any flattery , one of the dullest towns in the United States and I would not have remained two hours in the place , if I had not met with some good friends who made me forget its dreariness '' . Pike enjoyed his new social position tremendously , and cultivated in himself those traits necessary to its preservation . He was especially popular with women , for , like the romantic poetry he wrote , he was personally gracious , gallant , and chivalrous . He again began to play the violin , and tucking the instrument beneath his chin , performed soulful and romantic airs to match the expressions on the faces of the lovely women who gathered to hear him . His artistic accomplishments guaranteed him entry into any social gathering . He composed songs and set them to music and sang them in a soft , melodious voice , and when his audience had had enough of music he would discourse on politics or tell stories of his western adventures guaranteed to excite the emotions of men and women alike . The bulk of his early reputation , however , came not from his poetry or his music , but from his excellence as an orator . By 1834 the art of oratory had reached a very high level in the United States as a literary form . The orator of this period , in order to earn a reputation , had to pay close attention to the formal composition of his speech , judging how it would appear in print as well as the effect it would have on the audience that heard it . Very soon after his arrival in Little Rock , Pike had joined one of the most influential organizations in town , the Little Rock Debating Society , and it was with this group that he made his debut as an orator , being invited to deliver the annual Fourth of July address the club sponsored every year . Samuel Gorton , founder of Warwick , was styled by the historian Samuel Greene Arnold `` one of the most remarkable men who ever lived '' . A biographer called him `` the premature John the Baptist of New England Transcendentalism '' . The historian Charles Francis Adams called him `` a crude and half-crazy thinker '' . His contemporaries in Massachusetts called him an arch-heretic , a beast , a miscreant , a proud and pestilent seducer , a prodigious minter of exorbitant novelties . Edward Rawson , secretary of the colony of Massachusetts Bay , described him as `` a man whose spirit was stark drunk with blasphemies and insolence , a corrupter of the truth , a disturber of the peace wherever he comes '' . Nathaniel Morton stated he `` was deeply leavened with blasphemous and familistical opinions '' . He was thrown out , more or less , from Boston , Plymouth , Pocasset , Newport , and Providence . On the other hand , Dr. Ezra Styles recorded the following testimony of John Angell , the last disciple of Gorton : `` He said Gorton was a holy man ; ; wept day and night for the sins and blindness of the world had a long walk through the trees and woods by his house , where he constantly walked morning and evening , and even in the depths of the night , alone by himself , for contemplation and the enjoyment of the dispensation of light . He was universally beloved by his neighbours , and the Indians , who esteemed him , not only as a friend , but one high in communion with God in Heaven '' . Gorton sometimes signed himself `` a professor of the mysteries of Christ '' . There is plenty more to recommend Gorton , the facts of whose life are given in The Life And Times Of Samuel Gorton , by Adelos Gorton . He fought like a fiend for the helpless and oppressed , worked for the abolition of slavery , helped the Quakers and Indians , and worked against the prosecution of witches . He defied the Boston hierarchy , and after they sent a small army to get him he befuddled the court , including John Cotton , with one of the most complicated religious discourses ever heard . Samuel Gorton was born at Gorton , England , near the present city of Manchester , about 1592 . Although he did not attend any celebrated schools or universities , he was a master of Greek and Hebrew and could read the Bible in the original . He worked as a `` clothier '' in London , but was greatly concerned with religion . Gorton left England , he said , `` to enjoy libertie of conscience in respect to faith towards God , and for no other end '' . With his wife and three or more children he arrived in Boston in March , 1637 , and soon found it was no place for anyone looking for liberty of conscience . Roger Williams had recently been thrown out , and Anne Hutchinson and her Antinomians were slugging it out with the powers-that-be . Gorton and his family moved to Plymouth . Soon he was in trouble there , for defending a woman who was accused of smiling in church . She was Ellen Aldridge , a widow of good repute who was employed by Gorton's wife and lived with the family . The report was : `` It had been whispered privately that she had smiled in the congregation , and the Governor Prence sent to knoe her business , and command , after punishment as the bench see fit , her departure and also anyone who brought her to the place from which she came ' '' . Gorton said they were preparing to deport her as a vagabond , and to escape the shame she fled to the woods for several days , returning at night . He advised the poor woman not to appear in court as what she was charged with was not in violation of law . Gorton appeared for her , however , and what he told the magistrates must have been plenty , for he was charged with deluding the court , fined , and told to leave the colony within fourteen days . He left in a storm for Pocasset , December 4 , 1638 . His wife was in delicate health and nursing an infant with measles . The unconquerable Mrs. Hutchinson was residing at Pocasset , after having been excommunicated by the Boston church and thrown out of the colony . One can imagine that with her and Gorton there it was no place for anyone with weak nerves . William Coddington , who was running the colony , felt constrained to move seven miles south where , with others -- as mentioned above -- he founded Newport . When , in March , 1640 , the two towns were united under Coddington , Gorton claimed the union was irregular and illegally constituted and that it had never been sanctioned by the majority of freeholders . Then he became involved in a ruckus remarkably similar to the one in Plymouth . A cow owned by an old woman trespassed on Gorton's land . While driving the cow back home the woman was assaulted by a servant maid of Gorton . The old woman complained to the deputy governor , who ordered the servant brought before the court . Gorton reverted to his Plymouth tactics , refused to let her go , and appeared himself before the Portsmouth grand jury . During the trial he told off the jury , called them `` Just Asses '' and called a freeman `` a saucy boy and Jack-an-Apes '' . He was jailed and banished . Gorton then moved to Providence and soon put the town in a turmoil . He held that no group of colonists could set up or maintain a government without royal sanction . Since Rhode Island at that time did not have such sanction , his opinion was not popular . Roger Williams wrote his friend Winthrop as follows : `` Master Gorton , having foully abused high and low at Aquidneck is now bewitching and bemaddening poor Providence , both with his unclean and foul censures of all the ministers of this country ( for which myself have in Christ's name withstood him ) , and also denying all visible and external ordinances in depth of Familism : almost all suck in his poison , as at first they did at Aquidneck . Some few and myself withstand his inhabitation and town privileges , without confession and reformation of his uncivil and inhuman practices at Portsmouth ; ; yet the tide is too strong against us , and I fear ( if the framer of hearts help not ) it will force me to little Patience , a little isle next to your Prudence '' . Williams also stated : `` Our peace was like the peace of a man who hath the tertian ague '' . Providence finally managed to get Gorton out of the town , and he and some friends bought land at Pawtuxet on the west side of Narragansett Bay , five miles south but still within the jurisdiction of the Providence colony . This town should not be confused with Pawtucket , just north of Providence , or Pawcatuck , Connecticut , on the Pawcatuck River , opposite Westerly , Rhode Island . Up to now , Gorton had been looking for trouble , and now that he was trying to get away from it , trouble started looking for him . Upon intelligence that the formidable agitator was to favor them with his presence , the benighted inhabitants of Pawtuxet , alas , gave their allegiance to Massachusetts and asked that colony to expel the newcomers . As it was the custom of that alert colony to take over the property of persons asking for protection , this was an act roughly equivalent to throwing open the door to a pack of wolves and saying `` Come and get it '' . Gorton and company , however , promptly bought land from Miantonomi a few miles south of Pawtuxet , extending from the present Gaspee Point south to Warwick Neck and twenty miles inland . The settlement was called Shawomet . It was not within the jurisdiction of anybody or anything , including Providence and Massachusetts . If Gorton wanted peace and quiet for his complicated meditations this is where he should have had it . Instead of that he was engulfed by bedlam . Pomham and Soconoco , a couple of minor sachems ( of something less than exalted character ) under Miantonomi , declared that they had never assented to the sale of land to Gorton and had never received anything for it . Following the glorious lead of the heroes of Pawtuxet , they also submitted themselves to the protection of Massachusetts . One historical authority presents laborious and circuitous testimony tending to arouse suspicion that Massachusetts was behind the clouds settling down on the embattled Gorton . However , the General Court at Boston ordered the purchasers of Shawomet to appear before them to answer the sachems' claim . The purchasers rejected the order in two letters written in vigorous terms . Then Massachusetts switched to its standard tactics . It pointed out twenty-six instances of blasphemy in the letters , and ordered the writers to submit or force of arms would be used . The next week , forty soldiers were sent to get the miscreants . The latter tried to arbitrate through a delegation from Providence , which offer was declined by the invaders . The Commissioners at Boston wrote the victims to see their misdeeds and repent or they should `` look upon them as men prepared for slaughter '' . At Shawomet , women and children fled in terror across the Bay . The men fortified a blockhouse and got ready to fight , but meanwhile appealed to the King and again tried to arbitrate . Gorton evidently still had plenty to learn about Massachusetts , but he was learning fast . Governor Winthrop wrote : `` You may do well to take notice , that besides the title to land between the English and the Indians there , there are twelve of the English that have subscribed their names to horrible and detestable blasphemies , who are rather to be judged as blasphemous than they should delude us by winning time under pretence of arbitration '' . The attack started on October 2 , 1643 , and the Gortonists held out for a day and a night . The attackers sent for more soldiers , and the defenders , to save bloodshed , surrendered under the promise that they would be treated as neighbors . Promptly their livestock was taken and according to Gorton the soldiers were ordered to knock down anyone who should utter a word of insolence , and run through anyone who might step out of line . When the captives arrived in Boston , `` the chaplain ( of their captors ) went to prayers in the open streets , that the people might take notice what they had done in a holy manner , and in the name of the Lord '' . Gorton and ten of his friends were thrown in jail . On Sunday they refused to attend church . The magistrates were determined to compel them . The prisoners agreed , provided they might speak after the sermon , which was permitted . Here was Gorton's chance to indulge in something at which he was supreme . The Boston elders were great at befuddling the opposition with torrents of ecclesiastical obscurities , but Gorton was better . Reverend Cotton preached to them about Demetrius and the shrines of Ephesus . Gorton replied with blasts that scandalized the congregation . At the trial which took place later , the Pomham matter was completely omitted . The Gortonists were charged with blasphemy and tried for their lives . Four ecclesiastical questions were presented by the General Court to Gorton : `` 1 . Whether the Fathers , who died before Christ was born of the Virgin Mary , were justified and saved only by the blood which he shed , and the death which he suffered after his incarnation ? ? 2 . Whether the only price of our redemption were not the death of Christ on the cross , with the rest of his sufferings and obediences , in the time of his life here , after he was born of the Virgin Mary ? ? 3 . Who was the God whom he thinke we serve ? ? 4 . What he means when he saith , wee worship the starre of our God Remphan , Chion , Moloch '' ? ? Gorton answered in writing . All of the elders except three voted for death , but a majority of the deputies refused to sanction the sentence . Seven of the prisoners were sentenced to be confined in irons for as long as it pleased the court , set to work and , if they broke jail or proclaimed heresy , to be executed if convicted . The three others got off easier . The convicts were put in chains , paraded before the congregation at the Reverend Cotton's lecture as an example , and sent to prisons in various towns , where they languished all winter , chains included . When Fred wheeled him back into his room , the big one looking out on the back porch , and put him to bed , Papa told him he was very tired but that he had enjoyed greatly the trip downtown . `` I've been cooped up so long '' , he added . Getting out again , seeing old friends , had given his spirits a lift . That night after supper I went back over to 48 Spruce Street -- Ralph and I at that time were living at 168 Chestnut -- and Ralph went with me . Papa was still elated over his afternoon visit downtown . `` Baby , I saw a lot of old friends I hadn't seen in a long time '' , he told me , his eyes bright . `` It was mighty good for the old man to get out again '' . The next day he seemed to be in fairly good shape and still in excellent spirits . But a few days after Fred's return he began hemorrhaging and that was the beginning of early and complete disintegration . It began in the morning , and very quickly the hemorrhage was a massive one . We got Dr. Glenn to him as quickly as we could , and we wired Tom of Papa's desperate condition . The hemorrhage was in the prostate region ; ; Dr. Glenn saw at once what had happened . `` He has lost much blood '' , he said . `` It'll take a lot to replace it '' . `` Dr. Glenn , I've got a lot of blood '' , Fred spoke up , `` plenty of it . Let me give Papa blood '' . The doctor agreed , but explained that it would be necessary first to check Fred's blood to ascertain whether or not it was of the same type as Papa's . To give a patient the wrong type of blood , said the doctor , would likely kill him . That was in the days before blood banks , of course , and transfusions had to be given directly from donor to patient . One had to find a donor , and usually very quickly , whose blood corresponded with the patient's . And then it took considerably longer to make preparations for giving transfusions . They had to take blood samples to the laboratory to test them , for one thing , and there was much required preliminary procedure . They made the tests and came to Fred ; ; by now it was perhaps two days or longer after Papa had begun hemorrhaging . `` Fred , your blood matches your father's , all right '' , Dr. Glenn said . `` But we aren't going to let you give him any '' . `` But why in the name of God can't I give my father blood '' ? ? Fred demanded . `` Why can't I , Doctor '' ? ? `` Because , Fred , it could do him no good . It's too late now . He's past helping . He's as good as gone '' . And in a few minutes Papa was dead . It was well past midnight . Papa had left us about the same hour of the night that Ben had passed on . The date was June 20 , 1922 . `` W. O. Wolfe , prominent business man and pioneer resident of this section , died shortly after midnight Tuesday at his home 48 Spruce Street '' , the Asheville Times of Wednesday , June 21 , announced . `` Mr. Wolfe had been in declining health for many years and death was not unexpected '' . A biographical sketch followed . Funeral services were held Thursday afternoon at four o'clock at the home . Beloved Dr. R. F. Campbell , our First Presbyterian Church pastor , was in charge . The burial was out in Riverside Cemetery . All about him stood tombstones his own sensitive great hands had fashioned . A few years before his death Papa had agreed with Mama to make a joint will with her in which it would be provided that in the event of the death of either of them an accounting would be made to their children whereby each child would receive a bequest of $5000 cash . At his death Fred and Ralph , my husband , were named executors of the estate under the terms of the will . Fred and Ralph qualified as executors and paid off what debts were currently due , and they were all current , since Papa was never one to allow bills to go unpaid . The bills were principally for hospitalization and doctors' fees during the last years of his life , and when he died he owed in the main only current doctor's bills . After they had paid all his debts and the funeral costs , Ralph and Fred had some fourteen thousand dollars , as I remember , with which to pay the bequests . This , manifestly , would not provide $5000 to each of the surviving five children . So what Fred and Ralph did was to attempt to prorate the money fairly by taking into account what each of the five had received , if anything , from the estate before Papa's death . Consequently , Fred and Tom , the two who had been provided college educations , signed statements to the effect that each had received his bequest in full , and Effie and I were each allotted $5000 . Frank had been given about half his legacy to use in a business venture before Papa's death ; ; he was given the difference between that amount and $5000 . Tom had received four years of education at the University of North Carolina and two at Harvard , and Fred had been in and out of Georgia Tech and Carneigie Tech and part of the time had been a self-help student . So , because he had received less than Tom , it was felt proper that Fred should receive the few hundred dollars that remained . And that's how Papa's estate was divided . Papa , I should emphasize , had been an invalid the last several years of his life ; ; his hospital and doctor bills had been large and his income had been cut until he was receiving little except small rentals on some properties he still owned . Had he been able to escape this long siege of invalidism , I'm convinced , Papa would have left a sizable estate . But he had succeeded well , we agreed . He had left us a legacy far more valuable than houses and lands and stocks and bonds . For years Papa and Mama had been large taxpayers . I recall that several years their taxes exceeded $800 . In those years of lower property valuations and lower tax rates , that payment represented ownership of much property . `` Merciful God , Julia '' ! ! I have known Papa to exclaim on getting his tax bill , `` we're going to the dogs '' ! ! But he never expected to do that . And he didn't , by a long shot ! ! 35 . In the spring of his second year at Harvard , Tom had been offered a job at Northwestern University as an instructor in the English Department . But he had delayed accepting this job , and as he was leaving to come home to Papa in response to our telegram , he dropped a postcard to Miss McCrady , head of the Harvard Appointment Office , asking her please to write Northwestern authorities and explain the circumstances . Actually Tom had been postponing giving them an answer , I'm confident , because he did not want to go out there to teach . In fact , he didn't want to teach anywhere . He wanted to go back to Harvard for another year of playwriting . But Papa's death had further complicated the financing of Tom's hoped-for third year , and for the weeks following it Tom did not know whether his return to Harvard could be arranged . But things were worked out in the family and late in August he wrote Miss McCrady an explanatory letter in which he told her that matters at home had been in an unsettled condition after Papa's death and he had not known whether he would stay at home with Mama , accept the Northwestern job , or return to Harvard . But he was happy to tell her that his finances were now in such condition that he could go back to Harvard for a third year with Professor Baker . And that's what he did . That third year he wrote plays with a fury . I believe there are seventeen short plays by Tom now housed in the Houghton Library at Harvard ; ; I think I'm right in that figure . That fall he submitted to Professor Baker the first acts and outlines of the following acts of several plays , six of them , according to some of his associates , and he also worked on a play that he first called Niggertown , the material for which he had collected during the summer at home . Later this play would be called Welcome To Our City . In the spring , it must have been , he began working on the play that he called The House , which later would be Mannerhouse . That spring Welcome To Our City was selected for production by the 47 Workshop and it was staged in the middle of May . It ran two nights , and though it was generally praised , there was considerable criticism of its length . It ran until past one o'clock . That was Tom's weakness ; ; it was demonstrated , many critics would later point out , in the length of his novels . In this play there were so many characters and so much detail . Tom never knew how to condense , to boil down . He was always concerned with life , and he tried to picture it whole ; ; he wanted nothing compressed , tight . He was a big man , and he wanted nothing little , squeezed ; ; he despised parsimony , and particularly of words . In this play there were some thirty or more named characters and I don't know how many more unnamed . In describing it to Professor Baker after it had been chosen for production , he defended his great array of characters by declaring that he had included that many not because `` I didn't know how to save paint '' , but because the play required them . And he threatened someday to write a play `` with fifty , eighty , a hundred people -- a whole town , a whole race , a whole epoch '' . He said he would do it , though probably nobody would produce it , for his own `` soul's ease and comfort '' . That summer Tom attended the summer session at Harvard , but he did not ask Mama to send him back in the fall . Instead , he went down to New York and submitted Welcome To Our City to the Theatre Guild , which had asked him to let them have a look at it after Professor Baker had recommended it highly . He hung around New York , waiting to hear whether they would accept it for production and in that time came down to Asheville and also paid a short visit to Chapel Hill , where with almost childish delight he visited old friends and favorite campus spots . On returning to New York he had a job for several weeks ; ; it was visiting University of North Carolina alumni in New York to ask them for contributions to the Graham Memorial Building fund . The Graham Memorial would be the campus student union honoring the late and much beloved Edward Kidder Graham , who had been president when Tom entered the university . Well , the Theatre Guild kept that play , and kept it , and finally in December they turned it down . But they would reconsider it , they assured him , if he would rewrite it . Tom told me about it , how one evening he went over to see the Theatre Guild man . This man , Tom said , had the play shut up in his desk , I believe , and when Tom sat down , he pulled it out and apologetically told Tom that they wouldn't be able to use it . Tom said he almost burst into tears , he was so disappointed and put out . The man , Tom said , explained that it was not only too long and detailed but that as it stood it wasn't the sort of thing the public wanted . The public , Tom said the man told him , wanted realism , and his play wasn't that . It was fantastic writing , beautiful writing , the man declared , but the public , he insisted , wanted realism . Tom was not willing to revise the play according to the plan the man suggested . Such a revision , he said , would ruin it , would change his whole conception of the play as well as the treatment . He thought about it and he told the man he just couldn't do it over in accordance with the suggestions he had made . It was not until we had returned to the city to live , while I was still at Brown and Sharpe's , that I felt the full impact of evangelical Christianity . I came under the spell of a younger group in the church led by the pastor's older son . The spirit of this group was that we were -- and are -- living in a world doomed to eternal punishment , but that God through Jesus Christ has provided a way of escape for those who confess their sins and accept salvation . There are millions who accept this doctrine , but few indeed are those who accept it so truly that the fate of humanity lies as a weight on their souls night and day . This group in Park Place Church was made up of the earnest few . I was drawn deeper and deeper into these concerns and responsibilities . I engaged more and more in religious activities . Besides Church and Sunday School I went to out-of-door meetings on the sidewalk at the church door . I went to an afternoon service at the Aj . I went to the Christian Endeavor Society and to the evening service of the church . Much of this lacked the active support of the pastor . The young people were self-energizing , and I was energized . Once or twice my father asked me if I wasn't overdoing a bit in my churchgoing . Meanwhile I myself was not yet saved . At least I had been unable to lay hold on the experience of conversion . Try as I might to confess my sins and accept salvation , no answer came to me from heaven . Finally , after years , I gave up . The basic difficulty , I suppose , was in my ultimate inability to feel a burden of sin from which I sought relief . I was familiar with Pilgrim's Progress , which I read as literature . No load of sin had been laid on my shoulders , nor did earnest effort enable me to become conscious of one . There is , of course , the doctrine of original sin , which asserts that each of us as individuals partakes of the guilt of our first ancestor . In the rhyming catechism this doctrine is worded thus : `` In Adam's fall We sin-ned all '' . This doctrine was repugnant to my moral sense . I did not feel it presumptuous to expect that the Creator would be at least as just as the most righteous of His creatures ; ; and the doctrine of original sin is compounded of injustice . Some of these thoughts -- not all of them -- have taken organized form in later years . The actual impelling force which severed me from evangelical effort was of another sort . I became disgusted at being so preoccupied with the state of my own miserable soul . I found myself becoming one of that group of people who , in Carlyle's words , `` are forever gazing into their own navels , anxiously asking ' Am I right , am I wrong ' '' ? ? I bethought me of the Lord's Prayer , and these words came to mind : `` Thy kingdom come , Thy will be done , on earth as it is in heaven '' . They have remained on the opened page of my mind in all the years which since have passed . From that time to this my religious concern is that I might give effective help to the bringing in of God's kingdom on earth . I do not claim to be free from sin , or from the need for repentance and forgiveness . In my experience the assurance of forgiveness comes only when I have confessed to the wronged one and have made as full reparation as I can devise . There was one further step in my religious progress . This was taken after I came to live in Springfield , and it was made under the guidance of the Reverend Raymond Beardslee , a young preacher who came to the Congregational Church there at about the same time that I moved from New York . His father was a professor at Hartford Theological Seminary , and from him he acquired a conviction , which he passed along to me , that there is in the universe of persons a moral law , the law of love , which is a natural law in the same sense as is the physical law . It is most important that we recognize the law of love as being unbreakable in all personal relationships , whether individually , socially or as between whole nations of people . If obeyed , the law brings order and satisfaction . If disobeyed , the result is turmoil and chaos . As we observe moral law and physical law they appear as being inevitable . We can conceive of no alternatives . Their basis seems deeper than mere authority . They are not true because scientists or prophets say they are true . It is not the authority of God Himself which makes them true . Because God is what He is , the laws of the universe , material and spiritual , are what they are . Deity and Law are one and inseparable . With this conviction , the partition between the sacred and the secular disappears . One's daily work becomes sacred , since it is performed in the field of influence of the moral law , dealing as it does with people as well as with matter and energy . In his book Civilization And Ethics Albert Schweitzer faces the moral problems which arise when moral law is recognized in business life , for example . His Ethics defines `` possessions as the property of the community , of which the individual is sovereign steward . One serves society by conducting a business from which a certain number of employees draw their means of subsistence ; ; another by giving away his property in order to help his fellow man . Each will decide on his own course somewhere between these two extreme cases according to the sense of responsibility which is determined for him by the particular circumstances of his own life . No one is to judge others '' . He is uncompromising in assigning guilt to the man who finds it necessary to inflict or permit injury to one individual or group for the sake of a larger good . For this decision a man must take personal responsibility . Says he , `` I may never imagine that in the struggle between personal and supra-personal responsibility it is possible to make a compromise between the ethical and the purposive in the shape of a relative ethic ; ; or to let the ethical be superseded by the purposive . On the contrary it is my duty to make my own decision as between the two '' . Schweitzer seems , in fact , to acquire for himself a burden of sin , not bequeathed by Adam , but accumulated in the inevitable judgments which life requires of him as between greater and lesser responsibilities . This viewpoint I find interesting , but it has never weighed on my soul . Perhaps it should have . My own experience has followed simpler lines . An uncompromising belief in the moral law has the advantage of making religion natural , even as physical law is natural . Neither the engineer nor the ordinary citizen feels any self-consciousness in obeying the laws of matter and energy , nor can he achieve a sense of self-righteousness in such obedience . To obey the moral law is just ordinary common sense , applied to a neglected field . Religion thus becomes integrated with life . This truth that the moral law is natural has other important corollaries . One of them is that it gives meaning and purpose to life . In seeking for such meaning and purpose , Albert Schweitzer seized upon the concept of the `` sacredness of life '' . It is puzzling to the occidental mind ( to mine at least ) to assign `` sacredness '' to animal , insect , and plant life . These lives are in themselves outside of the moral order and are unburdened with moral responsibility . There is indeed a moral responsibility on man himself , for his own soul's sake , to respect lower life and to avoid the infliction of suffering , but this viewpoint Schweitzer rejects . So far as `` sacredness '' inheres in any aspect of creation it seems to me to be found in human personality , whether in Lambarene , Africa , or in Washington , D.C. . One cannot read the records of scientists , officials and travelers who have penetrated to the minds of the most savage races without realizing that each individual met with is a person . Read , for instance , in Malcolm MacDonald's Borneo People of Segura and her wise father Tomonggong Koh , and her final adjustment to encroaching civilization . Above all read in Jens Bjerre's The Last Cannibal Show the old man of the Wailbri tribe ( not cannibals ) in central Australia gave to the white man his choicest possession , while the tears streamed down his face . The Australian aborigine is the conventional exemplar of degraded humanity ; ; yet here was a depth of sensibility which is lacking in a considerable portion of the beneficiaries of our civilization . Persons , whether white , black , brown or yellow , are a concern of God . Respect for personality is a privilege and a duty for us as brothers . Such is the field for exercising our reverence . As to our action , let us align ourselves with the purpose expressed by Jesus in the Lord's Prayer : `` Thy kingdom come , Thy will be done , on earth as it is in heaven '' . With the knowledge that the kingdom comes by obedience to the moral law in our relations with all people , we have a firm intellectual grasp on both the means and the ends of our lives . This intellectual approach to spiritual life suited me well , because I was never content to lead a divided life . As I have said , words from Tennyson remain ever in my memory : `` That mind and soul , according well , May make one music as before '' . Let us now give some thought to the soul . When the young biologist , Dr. Ballard , began to show interest in our daughter Elizabeth , this induced a corresponding interest , on our part , in him . I asked one day what he was doing . He told me that he had a big newt and a little newt and that he was transplanting a big eye of the big newt onto the little newt and a little eye of the little newt onto the big newt . He was then noting that the big eye on the little newt hung back until the little eye had grown up to it , while the little eye on the big newt grew rapidly until it was as big as the other . Then I asked , `` What does that teach you '' ? ? Said he , `` It teaches me to wonder '' . This was a profound statement . In the face of the unfolding universe , our ultimate attitude is that of wonder . Wonder is indeed the intellectual gateway to the spiritual world . Gone are the days when , in the nineteenth century , scientists thought that they were close to the attainment of complete knowledge of the physical universe . For them only a little more needed to be learned , and then all physical knowledge could be neatly sorted , packaged and put in the inventory to be drawn on for the solution of any human problem . This complacency was blown to bits by the relativity of Einstein , the revelation of the complex anatomy of the atom and the discovery of the expanding universe . None of these discoveries were neatly rounded off bits of knowledge . Each faded out into the unexplored areas of the future . It is as if we , in our center of human observation , from time to time penetrate more deeply into the unknown . As our radius of penetration , R , increases , the area of new knowledge increases by Af , and the total of human knowledge becomes measured in terms of Af . Wonder grows . It is endless . There are some people , intelligent people , who seem to be untouched by the sea of wonder in which we are immersed and in which we spend our lives . One such is Abraham Meyer , the writer of a recent book , Speaking Of Man . This is a straightforward denial of the spiritual world and a vigorous defense of pure materialism . His inability to wonder vitiates his argument . The subject of immortality brings to mind a vivid incident which took place in 1929 at Montreux in Switzerland . Criticism is as old as literary art and we can set the stage for our study of three moderns if we see how certain critics in the past have dealt with the ethical aspects of literature . I have chosen five contrasting pairs , ten men in all , and they are arranged in roughly chronological order . Such a list must naturally be selective , and the treatment of each man is brief , for I am interested only in their general ideas on the moral measure of literature . Altogether , the list will give us considerable variety in attitudes and some typical ones , for these critics range all the way from censors to those who consider art above ethics , all the way from Plato to Poe . And most of the great periods are represented , because we will compare Plato and Aristotle from the golden age of Greece ; ; Stephen Gosson and Sir Philip Sidney from renaissance England ; ; Dr. Johnson and William Hazlitt of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries in England ; ; and James Russell Lowell and Edgar Allan Poe of nineteenth century American letters . Plato and Aristotle Plato and Aristotle agree on some vital literary issues . They both measure literature by moral standards , and in their political writings both allow for censorship , but the differences between them are also significant . While Aristotle censors literature only for the young , Plato would banish all poets from his ideal state . Even more important , in his Poetics , Aristotle differs somewhat from Plato when he moves in the direction of treating literature as a unique thing , separate and apart from its causes and its effects . All through The Republic , Plato attends to the way art relates to the general life and ultimately to a good life for his citizens . In short , he is constantly concerned with the ethical effects . When he discusses the subject matter of poetry , he asks what moral effect the scenes will have . When he turns briefly to literary style , in the Third Book , he again looks to the effect on the audience . He explains that his citizens must not be corrupted by any of the misrepresentations of the gods or heroes that one finds in much poetry , and he observes that all `` these pantomimic gentlemen '' will be sent to another state . Only those story tellers will remain who can `` imitate the style of the virtuous '' . Plato is , at times , just as suspicious of the poets themselves as he is of their work . When he discusses tyrants in the Eighth Book of The Republic , he pictures the poets as willing to praise the worst rulers . But the most fundamental objection he has to poets appears in the Tenth Book , and it is derived from his doctrine of ideal forms . In Plato's mind there is an irresolvable conflict between the poet and the philosopher , because the poet imitates only particular objects and is incapable of rising to the first level of abstraction , much less the highest level of ideal forms . True reality , of course , is the ideal , and the poet knows nothing of this ; ; only the philosopher knows the truth . Poets , moreover , dwell on human passions . And with this point about the passions , we encounter Plato's dualism . The same sort of thinking plays so large a part in both Babbitt and More , that we must examine it in some detail . Plato feels that man has two competing aspects , his rational faculty and his irrational . We can be virtuous only if we control our lower natures , the passions in this case , and strengthen our rational side ; ; and poetry , with all its emphasis on the passions , encourages the audience to give way to emotion . For this reason , then , poetry tends to weaken the power of control , the reason , because it tempts one to indulge his passions , and even the best of men , he maintains , may be corrupted by this subtle influence . Plato's attitude toward poetry has always been something of an enigma , because he is so completely sensitive to its charm . His whole objection , indeed , seems to rise out of a deep conviction that the poets do have great power to influence , but Plato seldom pays any attention to what might be called the poem itself . He is , rather , concerned with the effect on society and he wants the poets to join his fight for justice . He wants them to use their great power to strengthen man's rational side , to teach virtue , and to encourage religion . While Plato finally allows a few acceptable hymns to the gods and famous men , still he clearly leaves the way open for further discussion of the issue . He even calls upon the poets to defend the Muse and to show that poetry may contribute to virtue . He says : `` We may further grant to those of her ( Poetry's ) defenders who are lovers of poetry and yet not poets , the permission to speak in prose on her behalf : let them show not only that she is pleasant but also useful to States and to human life , and we will listen in a kindly spirit ; ; for if this can be proved we shall surely be the gainers -- I mean , if there is a use in poetry as well as a delight '' . When we turn to Aristotle's ideas on the moral measure of literature , it is at once apparent that he is at times equally concerned about the influence of the art . In the ideal state , for instance , he argues that the young citizens should hear only the most carefully selected tales and stories . For this reason , he would banish indecent pictures and speeches from the stage ; ; and the young people should not even be permitted to see comedies till they are old enough to drink strong wine and sit at the public tables . By the time they reach that age , however , Aristotle no longer worries about the evil influence of comedies . In Aristotle's analysis of tragedy in the Poetics , we find an attempt to isolate the art , to consider only those things proper to it , to discover how it differs from other arts , and to deal with the effects peculiar to it . He assures us , early in the Poetics , that all art is `` imitation '' and that all imitation gives pleasure , but he distinguishes between art in general and poetic art on the basis of the means , manner , and the objects of the imitation . Once the poetic arts are separated from the other forms , he lays down his famous definition of tragedy , which sets up standards and so lends direction to the remainder of the work . A tragedy , by his definition , is an imitation of an action that is serious , of a certain magnitude , and complete in itself . It should have a dramatic form with pleasing language , and it should portray incidents which so arouse pity and fear that it purges these emotions in the audience . Any tragedy , he maintains , has six elements : plot , character , and thought ( the objects of imitation ) , diction and melody ( the means of imitation ) , and spectacle ( the manner of imitation ) . Throughout the rest of the Poetics , Aristotle continues to discuss the characteristics of these six parts and their interrelationship , and he refers frequently to the standards suggested by his definition of tragedy . Aristotle's method in the Poetics , then , does suggest that we should isolate the work . The Chicago contingent of modern critics follow Aristotle so far in this direction that it is hard to see how they can compare one poem with another for the purpose of evaluation . But there are , however , several features of Aristotle's approach which open the way for the moral measure of literature . For one thing , Aristotle mentions that plays may corrupt the audience . In addition , his definition of a tragedy invites our attention , because a serious and important action may very well be one that tests the moral fiber of the author or of the characters . And there is one other point in the Poetics that invites moral evaluation : Aristotle's notion that the distinctive function of tragedy is to purge one's emotions by arousing pity and fear . He rejects certain plots because they do not contribute to that end . The point is that an ethical critic , with an assist from Freud , can seize on this theory to argue that tragedy provides us with a harmless outlet for our hostile urges . In his study Samuel Johnson , Joseph Wood Krutch takes this line when he says that what Aristotle really means by his theory of catharsis is that our evil passions may be so purged by the dramatic ritual that it is `` less likely that we shall indulge them through our own acts '' . In Krutch's view , this is one way to show how literature may be moral in effect without employing the explicit methods of a moralist . And we can add that Krutch's interpretation of purgation is also one answer to Plato's fear that poetry will encourage our passions . If Krutch is correct , tragedy may have quite the opposite effect . It may allay our passions and so restore the rule of reason . Or in more Freudian terms , the experience may serve to sublimate our destructive urges and strengthen the ego and superego . Gosson and Sidney The second half of the sixteenth century in England was the setting for a violent and long controversy over the moral quality of renaissance literature , especially the drama . No one suggested that the ethical effects of the art were irrelevant . Both sides agreed that the theater must stand a moral test , but they could not agree on whether the poets were a good or a bad influence . Both sides claimed that Plato and Aristotle supported their cause . Those who wanted to close the theaters , for example , pointed to Plato's Republic and those who wished to keep them open called on the Plato of the Ion to testify in their behalf . The most famous document that comes out of this dispute is perhaps Sir Philip Sidney's An Apologie For Poetrie , published in 1595 . Many students of literature know that classical defense . What is not so well known , however , and what is quite important for understanding the issues of this early quarrel , is the kind of attack on literature that Sidney was answering . For this reason , then I want to describe , first , two examples of the puritanical attacks : Stephen Gosson's The School Of Abuse , 1579 , and his later Playes Confuted , published in 1582 . Second , we will see how Sidney answered the charges , for while Sidney's essay was not specifically a reply to Gosson , his arguments do support the new theater . According to William Ringler's study , Stephen Gosson , the theater business in London had become a thriving enterprise by 1577 , and , in the opinion of many , a thoroughly bad business . Aroused by what they considered an evil influence , some members of the clergy , joined by city authorities , merchants , and master craftsmen , began the attack on the plays and the actors for what they called `` the abuses of the art '' , but by 1582 some of them began to denounce the whole idea of acting . Although this kind of wholesale objection came at first from some men who were not technically Puritans , still , once the Puritans gained power , they climaxed the affair by passing the infamous ordinance of 1642 which decreed that all `` public stage-plays shall cease and be forborne '' . With that act of Parliament the opponents of the stage won the day , and for more than two decades after that England had no legitimate public drama . In the early days of this controversy over the theater one of the interested parties , Stephen Gosson , published a little tract in which he objected mildly to the abuses of art , rather than the art itself . But his opposition hardened and by 1579 , in The School Of Abuse , he was ready to banish all `` players '' . He advises women to beware `` of those places which in sorrows cheere you and beguile you in mirth '' . He does not really approve of levity and laughter , but sex is the deadly sin . He warns that a single glance can lead us into temptation , for `` Looking eies have lyking hartes , and lyking hartes may burne in lust '' . But it would not be very satisfactory to leave our conclusions at the point just reached . Fortunately , it is possible to be somewhat more concrete and factual in diagnosing the involvement of values in education . For this purpose we now draw upon data from sociological and psychological studies of students in American colleges and universities , and particularly from the Cornell Values Studies . In the latter research program , information is available for 2,758 Cornell students surveyed in 1950 and for 1,571 students surveyed in 1952 . Of the latter sample , 944 persons had been studied two years earlier ; ; hence changes in attitudes and values can be analyzed for identical individuals at two points in time . In addition , the 1952 study collected comparable data from 4,585 students at ten other colleges and universities scattered across the country : Dartmouth , Harvard , Yale , Wesleyan , North Carolina , Fisk , Texas , University of California at Los Angeles , Wayne , and Michigan . We find , in the first place , that the students overwhelmingly approve of higher education , positively evaluate the job their own institution is doing , do not accept most of the criticisms levelled against higher education in the public prints , and , on the whole , approve of the way their university deals with value-problems and value inculcation . It is not our impression that these evaluations are naively uncritical resultants of blissful ignorance ; ; rather , the generality of these students find their university experience congenial to their own sense of values . Students are approximately equally divided between those who regard vocational preparation as the primary goal of an ideal education and those who chose a general liberal education . Other conceivable goals , such as character-education and social adjustment , are of secondary importance to them . The ideal of a liberal education impresses itself upon the students more and more as they move through college . Even in such technical curricula as engineering , the senior is much more likely than the freshman to choose , as an ideal , liberal education over specific vocational preparation . In the university milieu of scholarship and research , of social diversity , of new ideas and varied and wide-ranging interests , `` socialization '' into a campus culture apparently means heightened appreciation of the idea of a liberal education in the arts and sciences . Students' choices of ideal educational goals are not arbitrary or whimsical . There is a clear relationship between their educational evaluations and their basic pattern of general values . The selective and directional qualities of basic value-orientations are clearly evident in these data : the `` success-oriented '' students choose vocational preparation , the `` other-directed '' choose goals of social adjustment ( `` getting along with people '' ) , the `` intellectuals '' choose a liberal arts emphasis . The same patterned consistency shows itself in occupational choices . There is impressive consistency between specific occupational preferences and the student's basic conception of what is for him a good way of life . And , contrary to many popular assertions , the goal-values chosen do not seem to us to be primarily oriented to materialistic success nor to mere conformity . Our students want occupations that permit them to use their talents and training , to be creative and original , to work with and to help other people . They also want money , prestige , and security . But they are optimistic about their prospects in these regards ; ; they set limits to their aspirations -- few aspire to millions of dollars or to `` imperial '' power and glory . Within the fixed frame of these aspirations , they can afford to place a high value on the expressive and people-oriented aspects of occupation and to minimize the instrumental-reward values of power , prestige , and wealth . Occupational choices are also useful -- and interesting -- in bringing out clearly that values do not constitute the only component in goals and aspirations . For there is also the `` face of reality '' in the form of the individual's perceptions of his own abilities and interests , of the objective possibilities open to him , of the familial and other social pressures to which he is exposed . We find `` reluctant recruits '' whose values are not in line with their expected occupation's characteristics . Students develop occupational images -- not always accurate or detailed -- and they try to fit their values to the presumed characteristics of the imagined occupation . The purely cognitive or informational problems are often acute . Furthermore , many reluctant recruits are yielding to social demands , or compromising in the face of their own limitations of opportunity , or of ability and performance . Thus , many a creativity-oriented aspirant for a career in architecture , drama , or journalism , resigns himself to a real estate business ; ; many a people-oriented student who dreams of the M.D. decides to enter his father's advertising agency ; ; and many a hopeful incipient business executive decides it were better to teach the theory of business administration than to practice it . The old ideal of the independent entrepreneur is extant -- but so is the recognition that the main chance may be in a corporate bureaucracy . In their views on dating , courtship , sex , and family life , our students prefer what they are expected to prefer . For them , in the grim words of a once-popular song , love and marriage go together like a horse and carriage . Their expressed standards concerning sex roles , desirable age for marriage , characteristics of an ideal mate , number of children desired are congruent with the values and stereotypes of the preceding generation -- minus compulsive rebellion . They even accept the `` double standard '' of sex morality in a double sense , i.e. , both sexes agree that standards for men differ from standards for women , and women apply to both sexes a standard different from that held by men . `` Conservatism '' and `` traditionalism '' seem implied by what has just been said . But these terms are treacherous . In the field of political values , it is certainly true that students are not radical , not rebels against their parents or their peers . And as they go through college , the students tend to bring their political position in line with that prevalent in the social groups to which they belong . Yet they have accepted most of the extant `` welfare state '' provisions for health , security , and the regulation of economic affairs , and they overwhelmingly approve of the traditional `` liberalism '' of the Bill of Rights . When their faith in civil liberties is tested against strong pressures of social expediency in specific issues , e.g. , suppression of `` dangerous ideas '' , many waver and give in . The students who are most willing to acquiesce in the suppression of civil liberties are also those who are most likely to be prejudiced against minority groups , to be conformist and traditionalistic in general social attitudes , and to lack a basic faith in people . As one looks at the existing evidence , one finds a correlation , although only a slight one , between high grades and `` libertarian '' values . But the correlation is substantial only among upperclassmen . In other words , as students go through college , those who are most successful academically tend to become more committed to a `` Bill of Rights '' orientation . College in gross -- just the general experience -- may have varying effects , but the students who are successful emerge with strengthened and clarified democratic values . This finding is consistent also with the fact that student leaders are more likely to be supporters of the values implicit in civil liberties than the other students . There is now substantial evidence from several major studies of college students that the experience of the college years results in a certain , selective homogenization of attitudes and values . Detached from their prior statuses and social groups and exposed to the pervasive stimuli of the university milieu , the students tend to assimilate a new common culture , to converge toward norms characteristic of their own particular campus . Furthermore , in certain respects , there are norms common to colleges and universities across the country . For instance , college-educated people consistently show up in study after study as more often than others supporters of the Bill of Rights and other democratic rights and liberties . The interesting thing in this connection is that the norms upon which students tend to converge include toleration of diversity . To the extent that our sampling of the orientations of American college students in the years 1950 and 1952 may be representative of our culture -- and still valid in 1959 -- we are disposed to question the summary characterization of the current generation as silent , beat , apathetic , or as a mass of other-directed conformists who are guided solely by social radar without benefit of inner gyroscopes . Our data indicate that these students of today do basically accept the existing institutions of the society , and , in the face of the realities of complex and large-scale economic and political problems , make a wary and ambivalent delegation of trust to those who occupy positions of legitimized responsibility for coping with such collective concerns . In a real sense they are admittedly conservative , but their conservatism incorporates a traditionalized embodiment of the original `` radicalism '' of 1776 . Although we have no measures of its strength or intensity , the heritage of the doctrine of inalienable rights is retained . As they move through the college years our young men and women are `` socialized '' into a broadly similar culture , at the level of personal behavior . In this sense also , they are surely conformists . It is even true that some among them use the sheer fact of conformity -- `` everyone does it '' -- as a criterion for conduct . But the extent of ethical robotism is easily overestimated . Few students are really so faceless in the not-so-lonely crowd of the swelling population in our institutions of higher learning . And it may be well to recall that to say `` conformity '' is , in part , another way of saying `` orderly human society '' . In the field of religious beliefs and values , the college students seem to faithfully reflect the surrounding culture . Their commitments are , for the most part , couched in a familiar idiom . Students testify to a felt need for a religious faith or ultimate personal philosophy . Avowed atheists or freethinkers are so rare as to be a curiosity . The religious quest is often intense and deep , and there are students on every campus who are seriously wrestling with the most profound questions of meaning and value . At the same time , a major proportion of these young men and women see religion as a means of personal adjustment , an anchor for family life , a source of emotional security . These personal and social goals often overshadow the goals of intellectual clarity , and spiritual transcendence . The `` cult of adjustment '' does exist . It exists alongside the acceptance of traditional forms of organized religion ( church , ordained personnel , ritual , dogma ) . Still another segment of the student population consists of those who seek , in what they regard as religion , intellectual clarity , rational belief , and ethical guidance and reinforcement . Our first impression of the data was that the students were surprisingly orthodox and religiously involved . Upon second thought we were forced to realize that we have very few reliable historical benchmarks against which we might compare the present situation , and that conclusions that present-day students are `` more '' or `` less '' religious could not be defended on the basis of our data . As we looked more intently at the content of our belief and the extent of religious participation , we received the impression that many of the religious convictions expressed represented a conventional acceptance , of low intensity . But , here again , comparative benchmarks are lacking , and we do not know , in any case , what measure of profoundity and intensity to expect from healthy , young , secure and relatively inexperienced persons ; ; after all , feelings of immortality and invulnerability are standard illusions of youth . Nor are optimistic and socially-oriented themes at all rare in the distinctive religious history of this country . Kluckhohn recently has summarized evidence regarding changes in values during a period of years , primarily 1935-1955 , but extending much farther back in some instances . A variety of data are assembled to bear upon such alleged changes as diminished puritan morality , work-success ethic , individualism , achievement , lessened emphasis on future-time orientation in favor of sociability , moral relativism , consideration and tolerance , conformity , hedonistic present-time orientation . Although he questions the extent and nature of the alleged revival of religion and the alleged increase in conformity , and thinks that `` hedonistic '' present-time orientation does not have the meaning usually attributed to it , he does conclude that Americans increasingly enjoy leisure without guilt , do not stress achievement so much as formerly , are more accepting of group harmony as a goal , more tolerant of diversity and aware of other cultures . From New Jersey , Morgan hastened to the headquarters of Washington at Whitemarsh , Pennsylvania , arriving there on November 18th . There was much sickness in the corps , and the men were , in addition , without the clothing , shoes , and blankets needed for the winter weather . Morgan himself had sciatica again . Even on his tough constitution , the exposure and strenuous activity were beginning to tell in earnest . On the morning of November 17th , Cornwallis and 2,000 men had left Philadelphia with the object of capturing Fort Mercer at Red Bank , New Jersey . In order to prevent this , Washington hastened to dispatch several units to reinforce the fort , including a force under the Marquis De Lafayette containing some 160 of Morgan's riflemen , all who were fit for duty at this time , the rest having no shoes . Although the fort was evacuated in the face of the force of Cornwallis , Morgan and his men did have a chance to take another swing at the redcoats . A picket guard of about 350 , mostly Hessians , were attacked by the Americans under Lafayette , and driven back to their camp , some twenty to thirty of them falling before the riflemen's fire . `` I never saw men '' , Lafayette declared in regard to the riflemen , `` so merry , so spirited , and so desirous to go on to the enemy , whatever force they might have , as that small party in this fight '' . Nathanael Greene told Washington that `` Lafayette was charmed with the spirited behavior of the militia and riflemen '' . A few days later it was learned that General Howe was planning an attack upon the American camp . The British general moved his forces north from Philadelphia to Chestnut Hill , near the right wing of the patriot encampment . Here the Pennsylvania militia skirmished with the British , but soon fled . Morgan was ordered to attack the enemy , who had meantime moved to Edge Hill on the left of the Americans . Similar orders were given to the Maryland militia . Morgan immediately disposed his troops for action and found he had not long to wait . A body of redcoats were seen marching down a nearby slope , a tempting target for the riflemen , who threw a volley into their ranks and `` messed up '' the smart formation considerably . Now the riflemen and the Marylanders followed up their beginning and closed in on the British , giving them another telling round of fire . The redcoats ran like rabbits . But the Maryland militia had likewise fled , all too typical of this type of soldier during the Revolution , an experience which gave Morgan little confidence in militia in general , as he watched other instances of their breaking in hot engagements . The British , although suffering considerable losses , noted the defection of the Marylanders , made a stand , then turned and attacked Morgan who became greatly outnumbered and had to retire . The Americans lost forty-four men , among them Major Joseph Morris of Morgan's regiment , an officer who was regarded with high esteem and affection , not only by his commander , but by Washington and Lafayette as well . The latter was so upset on learning of the death of Morris , that he wrote Morgan a letter , showing his own warmhearted generosity . After complimenting Morgan and the riflemen and saying he was praising them to Congress , too , the ardent Frenchman added he felt that Congress should make some financial restitution to the widow and family of Morris , but that he knew Morgan realized how long such action usually required , if it was done at all . `` As Mrs. Morris may be in some want before that time '' , Lafayette continued , `` I am going to trouble you with a commission which I beg you will execute with the greatest secrecy . If she wanted to borrow any sum of money in expecting the arrangements of Congress , it would not become a stranger , unknown to her , to offer himself for that purpose . But you could ( as from yourself ) tell her that you had friends who , being with the army , don't know what to do with their money and would willingly let her have one or many thousand dollars '' . This was accordingly done , and the plight of the grateful Mrs. Morris was much relieved as a result of the generous loan , the amount of which is not known . Apparently still sensitive about the idea with which General Gates had approached him at Saratoga , namely , that George Washington be replaced , Morgan was vehement in his support of the commander-in-chief during the campaign around Philadelphia . Richard Peters , Secretary of the Board of War , thought Morgan was so extreme on the subject that he accused him of trying to pick a quarrel . Morgan hotly denied this and informed the Board of War that the men in camp linked the name of Peters with the plot against Washington . Peters insisted that this impression was a great misunderstanding , and evidently , from the quarrel , obtained an unfavorable impression of Morgan's judgment . Such a situation regarding the Board of War could hardly have helped Morgan's chances for promotion when that matter came before the group later on . In late December , the American army moved from Whitemarsh to Valley Forge , and although the distance was only 13 miles , the journey took more than a week because of the bad weather , the barefooted and almost naked men . The position of the new camp was admirably selected and well fortified , its easily defensible nature being one good reason why Howe did not attack it . Besides helping to prevent the movement of the British to the west , Valley Forge also obstructed the trade between Howe's forces and the farmers , thus threatening the vital subsistence of the redcoats and rendering their foraging to obtain necessary supplies extremely hazardous . In order to see that this hindering situation remained effective , Washington detached several bodies of his troops to the periphery of the Philadelphia area . Morgan and his corps were placed on the west side of the Schuylkill River , with instructions to intercept all supplies found going to the city and to keep a close eye on the movements of the enemy . The headquarters of Morgan was on a farm , said to have been particularly well located so as to prevent the farmers nearby from trading with the British , a practice all too common to those who preferred to sell their produce for British gold rather than the virtually worthless Continental currency . In his dealings with offenders , however , Morgan was typically firm but just . For example , he captured some persons from York County , who with teams were taking to Philadelphia the furniture of a man who had just been released from prison through the efforts of his wife , and who apparently was helpless to prevent the theft of his household goods . Morgan took charge of the furniture and restored it to its thankful owners , but he let the culprits who had stolen it go free . Morgan complained to Washington about the men detailed to him for scouting duty , most of them he said being useless . `` They straggle at such a rate '' , he told the commander-in-chief , `` that if the enemy were enterprising , they might get two from us , when we would take one of them , which makes me wish General Howe would go on , lest any incident happen to us '' . If the hardships of the winter at Valley Forge were trying for healthy men , they were , of course , much more so for those not in good health . Daniel Morgan's rheumatic condition worsened with the increase of the cold and damp weather . He had braved the elements and the enemy , but the strain , aided by the winter , was catching up with him at last . Also , he was now forty-three years old . The mild activity of his command during the sojourn of the troops at Valley Forge could be handled by a subordinate , he felt , so like Henry Knox , equally loyal to Washington , who went to Boston at this time , Morgan received permission to visit his home in Virginia for several weeks . In his absence , the rifle regiment was under the command of Major Thomas Posey , another able Virginian . But Morgan did not leave before he had written a letter to a William Pickman in Salem , Massachusetts , apparently an acquaintance , praising Washington and saying that the slanders propagated about him were `` opposed by the general current of the people to exalt General Gates at the expense of General Washington was injurious to the latter . If there be a disinterested patriot in America , 'tis General Washington , and his bravery , none can question '' . It is doubtful if Morgan was able to take home much money to his wife and children , for his pay , as shown by the War Department Abstracts of early 1778 was $75 a month as a colonel , and that apt to be delayed . He was shown a warm welcome regardless , and spent the time in Winchester recuperating from his ailment , enjoying his family and arranging his private affairs which were , of course , run down . His neighbors celebrated his return , even if it was only temporary , and Morgan was especially gratified by the quaint expression of an elderly friend , Isaac Lane , who told him , `` A man that has so often left all that is dear to him , as thou hast , to serve thy country , must create a sympathetic feeling in every patriotic heart '' . There must have been special feelings of joy and patriotism in the heart of Daniel Morgan too , when the news was received on April 30th of the recognition by France of the independence of the United States . His fellow Virginian , George Washington , had stated , `` I believe no event was ever received with more heartfelt joy '' . The dreary camp at Valley Forge was turned into an arena of rejoicing . Even the dignified Washington indulged in a game of wickets with some children . His soldiers on the whole did not celebrate so mildly . On May 6th , Morgan , who had returned , received from Washington orders to `` send out patrols under vigilant officers '' to keep near the enemy . `` The reason for this '' , the orders said , `` is that the enemy may think to take advantage of the celebration of this day . The troops must have more than the common quantity of liquor , and perhaps there will be some little drunkenness among them '' . Apparently no serious disorders resulted from the celebration , and within a few days , Morgan joined the force of Lafayette who now had command of some 2,000 men at Barren Hill , not far above Philadelphia on the Schuylkill . The Frenchman had been ordered to approach the enemy's lines , harass them and get intelligence of their movements . Interestingly enough , the order transmitted to Morgan through Alexander Hamilton also informed him that `` A party of Indians will join the party to be sent from your command at Whitemarsh , and act with them '' . These were Oneida Indians . Washington evidently was anxious for Morgan to be cautious as well as aggressive , for on May 17th , 18th and 20th he admonished the leader of the riflemen-rangers to be on the alert . Obviously the commander-in-chief had confidence that Morgan would furnish him good intelligence too , for on the 23rd of May , he told Morgan that the British were prepared to move , perhaps in the night , and asked Morgan to have two of his best horses ready to dispatch to General Smallwood with the intelligence obtained . Meantime , however , this same General Smallwood seemed to be serving chivalry as well as the American army . Colonel Benjamin Ford wrote to Morgan from Wilmington that he understood a Mrs. Sanderson from Maryland had obtained permission from Smallwood to visit Philadelphia , and would return on May 26th , escorted by several officers from Maryland `` belonging to the new levies in the British service '' . Ford urged Morgan to capture these men , who , he thought , might be disguised as Quakers or peasants . Morgan took the suggested steps , but when Mrs. Sanderson appeared , there was nobody with her but her husband , whom he promptly sent to headquarters to be questioned . But Morgan evidently reported matters of intelligence much more important to his commanding general . A letter of a few days later from Washington's aide to Morgan stated , `` His Excellency is highly pleased with your conduct upon this occasion '' . For by now the original cause of the quarrel , Philip's seizure of Gascony , was only one strand in the spider web of French interests that overlay all western Europe and that had been so well and closely spun that the lightest movement could set it trembling from one end to the other . Even so , Edward's ambassadors can scarcely have foreseen that five years of unremitting work lay ahead of them before peace was finally made and that when it did come the countless embassies that left England for Rome during that period had very little to do with it . It is hard not to lay most of the blame for their failures on the pope . Nogaret is hardly an impartial witness , and even he did not make his charges against Boniface until the latter was dead , but there is some truth in what he said and more in what he did not say . It was not merely a hunger for `` money , gold and precious objects '' that delayed the papal pronouncement that could have brought the war to an end ; ; the pope was playing a dangerous game , with so many balls in the air at once that a misstep would bring them all about his ears , and his only hope was to temporize so that he could take advantage of every change in the delicate balance of European affairs . When the negotiations began , his quarrel with the king of France was temporarily in abeyance , and he had no intention of reviving it so long as there was hope that French money would come to pay the troops who , under Charles of Valois , the papal vicar of Tuscany , were so valuable in the crusade against the Colonna cardinals and their Sicilian allies . If his circumspection in regard to Philip's sensibilities went so far that he even refused to grant a dispensation for the marriage of Amadee's daughter , Agnes , to the son of the dauphin of Vienne -- a truly peacemaking move according to thirteenth-century ideas , for Savoy and Dauphine were as usual fighting on opposite sides -- for fear that he might seem to be favoring the anti-French coalition , he would certainly never take the far more drastic step of ordering the return of Gascony to Edward , even though , as he admitted to the English ambassadors , he had been advised that the original cession was invalid . On the other hand , he did not want to offend Edward either , and he found himself in a very difficult position . On the surface , the whole question was purely feudal . The French were now occupying Gascony and Flanders on the technical grounds that their rulers had forfeited them by a breach of the feudal contract . But Edward was invading Scotland for precisely the same reason , and his insubordinate vassal was the ally of the king of France . Boniface had to uphold the sacredness of the feudal contract at all costs , for it was only as suzerain of Sicily and of the Patrimony of Peter that he had any justification for his Italian wars , but in the English-Scottish-French triangle it was almost impossible for him to recognize the claims of any one of the contestants without seeming to invalidate those of the other two . Because of these involvements in the matter at stake , Boniface lacked the impartiality that is supposed to be an essential qualification for the position of arbiter , and in retrospect that would seem to be sufficient reason why the English embassies to the Curia proved so fruitless . But when the situation was so complicated that even Nogaret , one of the principal actors in the drama , could misinterpret the pope's motives , it is possible that Othon and his companions , equally baffled , attributed their difficulties to a more immediate cause . This was Boniface's monumental tactlessness . `` Tact '' , by its very derivation , implies that its possessor keeps in touch with other people , but the author of Clericis Laicos and Unam Sanctam , the wielder of the two swords , the papal sun of which the imperial moon was but a dim reflection , the peer of Caesar and vice-regent of Christ , was so high above other human beings that he had forgotten what they were like . He was a learned and brilliant man , one of the best jurists in Europe and with flashes of penetrating insight , and yet in his dealings with other people , particularly when he tried to be ingratiating , he was capable of an abysmal stupidity that can have come only from a complete incomprehension of human nature and human motives . This lofty disregard for others was not shared by such men as Pierre Flotte and his associates , that `` brilliant group of mediocre men '' , as Powicke calls them , who provided the brains for the French embassy that came to Rome under the nominal leadership of the archbishop of Narbonne , the duke of Burgundy , and the count of St.-Pol . They had risen from humble beginnings by their own diligence and astuteness , they were unfettered by the codes that bound nobles like Othon or even the older generation of clerks like Hotham , and they were working for an end that their opponents had never even visualized . Boniface was later to explain to the English that Robert of Burgundy and Guy De St.-Pol were easy enough to do business with ; ; it was the clerks who caused the mischief and who made him say that the ruling passion of their race was covetousness and that in dealing with them he never knew whether he had to do with a Frenchman or with a devil . To the pope , head of the universal Church , to the duke of Burgundy , taking full advantage of his position on the borders of France and of the Empire , or to Othon , who found it quite natural that he should do homage to Edward for Tipperary and to the count of Savoy for Grandson , Flotte's outspoken nationalism was completely incomprehensible . And yet he made no pretense about it ; ; when the pope , trying no doubt to appeal to his better nature , said to him , `` You have already taken Normandy . Do you want to drive the king of England from all his overseas possessions '' ? ? The Frenchman's answer was a terse `` Vous dites vrai '' . Loyal and unscrupulous , with a single-minded ambition to which he devoted all his energies , he outmatched the English diplomats time and time again until , by a kind of poetic justice , he fell at the battle of Courtrai , the victim of the equally nationalistic if less articulate Flemings . The English , relying on a prejudiced arbiter and confronted with superior diplomatic skill , were also hampered in their negotiations by the events that were taking place at home . The Scots had found a new leader in William Wallace , and Edward's yearly expeditions across the Border called for evermounting taxes , which only increased his difficulties with the barons and the clergy . He was unable to send any more help to his allies on the Continent , and during the next few years many of them , left to resist French pressure unaided , surrendered to the inevitable and made their peace with Philip . The defeat and death of Adolf of Nassau at the hands of Albert of Habsburg also worked to the disadvantage of the English , for all the efforts to revive the anti-French coalition came to nothing when Philip made an alliance with the new king of the Romans . These shifts in alliance and allegiance not only increased the difficulties confronting the English embassy as a whole , but also directly involved the two Savoyards , Amadee and Othon . In spite of the armistice negotiated by Amadee two years earlier , the war between Bishop Guillaume of Lausanne and Louis of Savoy was still going on , and although little is known about it , that little proves that it was yet another phase of the struggle against French expansion and was closely interwoven with the larger conflict . A second truce had been arbitrated in April , 1298 , by Jean D'Arlay , lord of Chalon-sur-Saone , the most staunch of Edward's Burgundian allies , and these last were represented in the discussions at the Curia by Gautier de Montfaucon , Othon's neighbor and a member of the Vaudois coalition . But although in many of these discussions Othon and Amadee might have been tempted to consider their own interests as well as those of the king , Edward's confidence in them was so absolute that they were made the acknowledged leaders of the embassy . Amadee may have owed this partly to his relationship with the king , but Othon , who at sixty seems still to have been a simple knight , merited his position solely by his own character and ability . The younger men , Vere , and Pembroke , who was also Edward's cousin and whose Lusignan blood gave him the swarthy complexion that caused Edward of Carnarvon's irreverent friend , Piers Gaveston , to nickname him `` Joseph the Jew '' , were relatively new to the game of diplomacy , but Pontissara had been on missions to Rome before , and Hotham , a man of great learning , `` jocund in speech , agreeable to meet , of honest religion , and pleasing in the eyes of all '' , and an archbishop to boot , was as reliable and experienced as Othon himself . But all the reports of this first embassy show that the two Savoyards were the heads of it , for they were the only ones who were empowered to swear for the king that he would abide by the pope's decision and who were allowed to appoint deputies in the event that one was unavoidably absent . This also gave them the unpleasant duty of being spokesmen for the mission , and they could foresee that that would not be easy . Underneath all the high-sounding phrases of royal and papal letters and behind the more down-to-earth instructions to the envoys was the inescapable fact that Edward would have to desert his Flemish allies and leave them to the vengeance of their indignant suzerain , the king of France , in return for being given an equally free hand with the insubordinate Scots . This was a doubly bitter blow to the king . In the eyes of those who still cared for such things , it was a reflection on his honor , and it gave further grounds for complaint to his overtaxed subjects , who were already grumbling -- although probably not in Latin -- `` Non est lex sana Quod regi sit mea lana '' . Bad relations between England and Flanders brought hard times to the shepherds scattered over the dales and downs as well as to the crowded Flemish cities , and while the English , so far , had done no more than grumble , Othon had seen what the discontent might lead to , for before he left the Low Countries the citizens of Ghent had risen in protest against the expense of supporting Edward and his troops , and the regular soldiers had found it unexpectedly difficult to put down the nasty little riot that ensued . In all the talk of feudal rights , the knights and bishops must never forget the woolworkers , nor was it easy to do so , for all along the road to Italy they passed the Florentine pack trains going home with their loads of raw wool from England and rough Flemish cloth , the former to be spun and woven by the Arte Della Lana and the latter to be refined and dyed by the Arte Della Calimala with the pigment recently discovered in Asia Minor by one of their members , Bernardo Rucellai , the secret of which they jealously kept for themselves . These chatty merchants made amusing and instructive traveling companions , for their business took them to all four corners of the globe , and Florentine gossip had already reached a high stage of development as even a cursory glance at the Inferno will prove . A northern ambassador , willing to keep his mouth shut and his ears open , could learn a lot that would stand him in good stead at the Curia . They had other topics of conversation , besides their news from courts and fairs , which were of interest to Othon , the builder of castles in Wales and churches in his native country . Behind him lay the Low Countries , where men were still completing the cathedrals that a later Florentine would describe as `` a malediction of little tabernacles , one on top of the other , with so many pyramids and spires and leaves that it is a wonder they stand up at all , for they look as though they were made of paper instead of stone or marble '' ; ; the Low Countries , where the Middle Ages were to last for another two centuries and die out only when Charles the Bold of Burgundy met his first defeat in the fields and forests below the walls of Grandson . It usually turned out well for him because either he liked the right people or there were only a few wrong people in the town . Alfred wanted to invest in my father's hotel and advance enough money to build a larger place . It was a very tempting offer . My father would have done it if it hadn't been for my mother , who had a fear of being in debt to anyone -- even Alfred Alpert . In spite of his being well liked there were a few people who were very careful about Alfred . They had my mother's opinion of him : that he was too sharp or a little too good to be true . One of the people who was afraid of Alfred was his own brother , Lew . I don't know how and I don't know why but the two stores , the one in Margaretville and the one in Fleischmanns that had been set up as a partnership , were dissolved , separated from each other . Everything was all very friendly , except when it came to Harry , the youngest brother . Alfred , who was a good deal older than Harry , had treated him like a son , and when Harry decided to stay in business with Lew instead of going with Alfred , Alfred looked on the decision as a betrayal . From that day on he never spoke to Harry or to Lew , or to Lew's two boys , Mort and Jimmy . The six miles between the towns became an ocean and the Alperts became a family of strangers . Time went on and everybody got older . I became fifteen , sixteen , then twenty , and still Tessie Alpert sat on the porch with a rose in her hair , and Alfred got richer and sicker with diabetes . It was in the spring of the year when he took to his bed and Tessie and Alfred found out that they didn't know each other . They were like two strangers . The store was their marriage , and when Alfred had to leave it there was nothing to hold them together . Tessie , everybody thought , was a strong woman , but she was only strong because she had Alfred to lean on . And when Alfred was forced into his bed , Tessie left the front porch of the store and sat at home , rocking in her rocker in the living room , staring out the window -- the rose still in her hair . Tessie could do nothing for Alfred . She couldn't cook or clean or make him comfortable . Instead she waited for Alfred to get better and take care of her . Spring was life -- and Alfred Alpert in his sickroom was death . Alfred knew that , too . I remember him pointing out of the window and saying that he wished he could live to see another spring but that he wouldn't . Alfred began to put his affairs in order , and he went about it like a man putting his things into storage . My father , who liked Alfred very much , was a constant visitor . One day Alfred told him that he had decided to leave everything to me . My father , a wise man , asked him not to . He knew Alfred liked me ; ; if he wanted to leave me something let it be a trinket , nothing else . By leaving me everything he wouldn't be doing me a favor , my father told him , and he didn't want to see his daughter involved in a lawsuit . He didn't want Alfred to leave me trouble because that's all it would be , and Alfred understood . Alfred was getting too sick to stay in his own home . The doctor wanted him in a hospital ; ; the nearest one was forty miles away in Kingston . The day Alfred left his home and Fleischmanns he gave up the convictions of a lifetime . He sent me for Meltzer the Butcher , whom he wanted not as a friend but as a rabbi . Meltzer knew why I had come for him . Solemnly he walked me back to Alfred's house without a word passing between us . He entered the house in silence , walked into Alfred's room , and closed the door behind him . I sat down to wait , and I watched Tessie Alpert , who hadn't moved or said a word but kept staring out of the window . For a few minutes there was nothing to hear . Then Meltzer's voice , quiet , calm , strong , started the Kaddish , the prayer for the dead . I could hear Alfred's voice a few words behind Meltzer's like a counterpoint , punctuated by sobs of sorrow and resignation . There was a finality in the rhythm of the prayer -- it was the end of a life , the end of hope , and the wondering if there would ever be another beginning . Meltzer stayed with Alfred , and when the door opened they both came out . Alfred was dressed for his trip to the hospital . The car was waiting for him . Alfred , leaning on Meltzer , stopped for a minute to look at Tessie . She didn't turn away from the window . Alfred nodded a little nod and went out through the door . Outside , his brother Harry was waiting for him -- he had come to say good-bye . Alfred walked past him without a word and got into the car . Harry ran to the side of the car where Alfred was sitting and looked at him , begging him to speak . Alfred looked straight ahead . The car began to move and Harry ran after it crying , `` Alfred ! ! Alfred ! ! Speak to me '' . But the car moved off and Alfred just looked straight ahead . Harry followed the car until it reached the main road and turned towards Kingston . He stood there watching until it had gone from his sight . I went to visit Alfred in the Kingston Hospital a few times . The first time I went there he asked me to bring him water from Flagler's well -- water that reminded him of his first days in the mountains -- and before I came the next time I filled a five-gallon jug for him and brought it to the hospital . I don't think he ever got to drink any of it . The jug stayed at the hospital and the water -- what can happen to water ? ? -- it evaporated , disappeared , and came back to the earth as rain -- maybe for another well or another stream or another Alfred Alpert . 12 `` where is it written '' ? ? Mr. Banks was always called Banks the Butcher until he left town and the shop passed over to Meltzer the Scholar who then became automatically Meltzer the Butcher . Meltzer was a boarder with the Banks family . He came to Fleischmanns directly from the boat that brought him to America from Russia . He was a learned man and a very gentle soul . He was filled with knowledge of the Bible and the Talmud . He knew the whyfores and the wherefores but he was weak , very weak , on the therefores . Banks the Butcher took Meltzer the Scholar as an apprentice and he made it very clear that a man of learning must be able to do more than just quote the Commentaries of the Talmud in order to live . So Meltzer learned a new trade from Banks , who supplied the town and the hotels with meat . Banks had a family -- a wife , a daughter , and a son . The daughter , Lilly , was a very good friend of mine and I always had hopes that someday she and Meltzer would find each other . They lived in the same house and it didn't seem to be such a hard thing to do , but the sad realities of Lilly's life and the fact that Meltzer didn't love her never satisfied my wishful thinking . Banks the Butcher was a hard master and a hard father , a man who didn't seem to know the difference between the living flesh of his family and the hanging carcasses of his stock in trade . He treated both with equal indifference and with equal contempt ; ; perhaps he was a little more sympathetic to the sides of beef that hung silently from his hooks . Lilly Banks and I became friends . She was the opposite of everything she should have been -- a positive pole in a negative home , a living reaction of warmth and kindness to the harsh reality of her father . And Lilly's whole family seemed to be an apology for Mr. Banks . Her brother Karl was a very gentle soul , her mother was a quiet woman who said little but who had hard , probing eyes . For every rude word of Mr. Banks's the family had five in apology . Every chance I got I left the hotel to visit Lilly . I was free but she was bound to her duties that not even the coming of Meltzer lightened . She had to clean the glass on the display cases in the butcher shop , help her brother scrub the cutting tables with wire brushes , mop the floors , put down new sawdust on the floors and help check the outgoing orders . When these chores were finished , only then , was she allowed whatever freedom she could find . I helped Lilly in the store . To me it was a game , to her it was the deadly seriousness of life . I wanted to help so that we could find time to play . And Lilly allowed me to help so that she could have her few little hours of escape . When the work was finished , we would walk . The road past the butcher shop took us along the side of a stream . It ran north , away from the town and the people , through woods and past the nothingness of a graveyard . Lilly preferred the loneliness of that walk . I would have liked the town and the busyness of its people but I always followed Lilly into the peace of the silent and unstaring road . It wasn't hard to understand . To me Lilly was a fine and lovely girl . To people who didn't know her she was a gawky , badly dressed kid whose arms were too long , whose legs were a little too bony . She had the hips of a boy and a loose-jointed walk that reminded me of a string of beads strolling down the street . And she had the kind of crossed eyes that shocked . It was unexpected , unexpected because Lilly walked with her head bent down , down , and her mark of friendship was to look into your face . I accepted her crossed eyes as she accepted my childishness ; ; childishness compared to her grown-up understanding that life was a punishment for as yet undisclosed sins . We were almost the same age , she was fifteen , I was twelve , and where I felt there was a life to look forward to Lilly felt she had had as much of it as was necessary . When we went for our walks Lilly's brother would come along every once in a while . Karl was an almost exact copy of his father physically and it was strange to see the expected become the unexpected . This huge hulk played the guitar and he would take it along on our walks and play for us as we sat alone in the woods or by the stream . Karl played well and his favorite song was a Schubert lullaby . He spoke no German but he could sing it and the words of the song were the only ones he knew in a foreign language . The song , he said , was called `` The Stream's Lullaby '' , and when he sang , `` Gute ruh , Gute ruh , Mach't die augen zu , '' there was such longing and such simple sadness that it frightened me . Later , when I was older , I found the song was part of Schubert's Die Schone Mullerin . And even hearing it in a concert hall surrounded by hundreds of people the words and the melody would make me a little colder and I would reach out for my husband's hand . The brother and sister seemed to be a sort of mutual-aid society , a little fortress of kindness for each other in a hard world . I felt very flattered to be included in the protection of their company even though I had nothing to be protected from . The turn of the century , or to be more precise , the two decades preceeding and following it , marks a great change in the history of early English scholarship . At the bottom of this change were great strides forward in the technical equipment and technical standards of the historian . In archaeology , for example , the contributions of Frederick Haverfield and Reginald Smith to the various volumes of the Victoria County Histories raised the discipline from the status of an antiquarian pastime to that of the most valuable single tool of the early English historian . And with the publication of E. T. Leeds' Archaeology Of The Anglo-Saxon Settlements the student was presented with an organized synthesis of the archaeological data then known . What was true for archaeology was also true of place-name studies . The value of place-names in the reconstruction of early English history had long been recognized . Place-names , in fact , had been extensively utilized for this purpose from the time of Camden onwards . Without a precise knowledge of Germanic philology , however , it is debatable whether their use was not more often a source of confusion and error than anything else . Even in the nineteenth century such accomplished philologists as Kemble and Guest were led into what now seem ludicrous errors because of their failure to recognize that modern forms of place names are not necessarily the result of logical philological development . It was therefore not until the publication of J.H. Round's `` The Settlement Of The South And East Saxons '' , and W.H. Stevenson's `` Dr. Guest And The English Conquest Of South Britain '' , that a scientific basis for place-name studies was established . Diplomatic is another area for which the dawn of the twentieth century marks the beginning of modern standards of scholarship . Although because of the important achievements of nineteenth century scholars in the field of textual criticism the advance is not so striking as it was in the case of archaeology and place-names , the editorial principles laid down by Stevenson in his great edition of Asser and in his Crawford Charters were a distinct improvement upon those of his predecessors and remain unimproved upon today . In sum , it can be said that the techniques and standards of present day have their origin at the turn of the century . And it is this , particularly the establishment of archaeology and place-name studies on a scientific basis , which are immediately pertinent to the Saxon Shore . Almost inevitably , the first result of this technological revolution was a reaction against the methods and in many cases the conclusions of the Oxford school of Stubbs , Freeman and ( particularly ) Green regarding the nature of the Anglo-Saxon conquest of Britain . Even before the century was out the tide of reaction had set in . Charles Plummer in the introduction and notes to his splendid edition of Bede voiced some early doubts concerning the `` elaborate superstructure '' they raised up over the slim foundations afforded by the traditional narratives of the conquest . It was Plummer , in fact , who coined the much quoted remark : `` Mr. Green indeed writes as if he had been present at the landing of the Saxons and had watched every step of their subsequent progress '' . Sir Henry Howorth , writing in 1898 , put himself firmly in the Lappenburg-Kemble tradition by attacking the veracity of the West Saxon annals . Early in the present century , W. H. Stevenson continued the attack with a savage article against Guest . Following him in varying degrees of scepticism were T.W. Shore , H.M. Chadwick , Thomas Hodgkin and F. G. Beck . By 1913 , Ferdinand Lot could begin an article subtitled `` La Conquete De La Grande-Bretagne par Les Saxons '' with the words , `` Il est difficile aujourd'hui d'entretenir des illusions sur la valeur du recit traditionnel de la conquete de la Grande-Bretagne . '' It is also worthy of note that Lot cited both Kemble and Lappenberg with favor in that article . It would seem that the wheel had turned full circle . In fact , modern scholarly opinion in the main has not retreated all the way back to the destructive scepticism of the first half of the nineteenth century . Although one meets with occasional extremists like Zachrisson or , very recently , Arthur Wade-Evans the majority of scholars have taken a middle position between the extremes of scepticism and gullibility . Most now admit that Bede , Gildas , Nennius and The Anglo-Saxon Chronicles cannot be the infallible guides to early English history that Guest , Freeman and Green thought them to be . As R.H. Hodgkin has remarked : `` The critical methods of the nineteenth century shattered most of this picturesque narrative . On the other hand , the consensus of opinion is that , used with caution and in conjunction with other types of evidence , the native sources still provide a valid rough outline for the English settlement of southern Britain . As Sir Charles Oman once said , `` it is no longer fashionable to declare that we can say nothing certain about Old English origins '' . Therefore , in one way Kemble and Lappenberg have been vindicated . Their conclusions concerning the untrustworthiness of the West Saxon annals , the confused chronology of Bede , the unreliability of the early positions of the Anglo-Saxon genealogies and the mythological elements contained in Nennius are now mostly accepted . Nevertheless , in another way modern historians still labor in the vineyard of the Oxford school . For it is their catastrophic concept of the Anglo-Saxon invasions rather than Kemble's gradualist approach which dominates the field . Despite the rejection of the traditional accounts on many points of detail , as late as 1948 it was still possible to postulate a massive and comparatively sudden ( beginning in ca. 450 ) influx of Germans as the type of invasions . At this point , of course , the issue has become complicated by a development unforeseen by Lappenberg and Kemble . They , however much they were in disagreement with the late Victorians over the method by which Britain was Germanized , agreed with them that the end result was the complete extinction of the previous Celtic population and civilization . But beginning , for all practical purposes , with Frederick Seebohm's English Village Community scholars have had to reckon with a theory involving institutional and agrarian continuity between Roman and Anglo-Saxon times which is completely at odds with the reigning concept of the Anglo-Saxon invasions . Against Seebohm formidable foes have taken the field , notably F. W. Maitland , whose Domesday Book And Beyond was written expressly for this purpose , and Sir Paul Vinogradoff whose The Growth Of The Manor had a similar aim . Largely due to their efforts the catastrophic invasion-theory has maintained its position although Seebohm has always found supporters . H.L. Gray in his English Field Systems and Zachrisson's Romans , Kelts And Saxons defended in part the Seebohm thesis while at the present time H.P.R. Finberg and Gordon Copley seem to fall into the Celtic survivalist camp . This is nevertheless a minority view . Most scholars , while willing to accept a survival ( revival ? ? ) of Celtic art forms and a considerable proportion of the Celtic population , reject any institutional legacy from pre-Anglo-Saxon Britain . Therefore , it is plain that the clear distinctions of the nineteenth century are no longer with us . In the main stream of historical thinking is a group of scholars , H.M. Chadwick , R.H. Hodgkin , Sir Frank Stenton et al. who are in varying degrees sceptical of the native traditions of the conquest but who defend the catastrophic type of invasion suggested by them . They , in effect , have compromised the opposing positions of the nineteenth century . On the other side are the Celtic survivalists who have taken a tack divergent from both these schools of nineteenth century thought . As a group they should be favorable to a concept of gradual Germanic infiltration although the specialist nature of much of their work , e.g. Seebohm , Gray and Finberg , tends to obscure their sympathies . Those who do have occasion to deal with the invasions in a more general way , like T.W. Shore and Arthur Wade-Evans , are on the side of a gradual and often peaceful Germanic penetration into Britain . Wade-Evans , in fact , denies that there were any Anglo-Saxon invasions at all other than a minor Jutish foray in A.D. 514 . Now omitting for a moment some recent developments we can say the Saxon Shore hypothesis of Lappenberg and Kemble has undergone virtual eclipse in this century . It is no longer possible to say that a sceptical attitude towards the received accounts of the invasions almost automatically produces a `` shore occupied by '' interpretation . Everyone is more or less sceptical and virtually no one has been willing to accept Lappenberg or Kemble's position on that point . One reason is , of course , that the new scepticism has been willing to maintain the general picture of the invasions as portrayed in the traditional sources . The few scholars who have adopted the `` shore occupied by '' interpretation , Howorth , Shore , and Wade-Evans , have all been Celtic survivalists . Moreover , they have done so in rather special circumstances . The primary reason for the abandonment of the `` shore occupied by '' thesis has been the assimilation and accumulation of archaeological evidence , the most striking feature of early English studies in this century . Again omitting recent developments , E.T. Leeds' dictum of 1913 has stood unchallenged : `` So far as archaeology is concerned , there is not the least warrant for the second ( shore occupied by ) of these theories '' . Even earlier Haverfield had come to the same conclusion . What they meant was that there was no evidence to show that the south and east coasts of Britain received Germanic settlers conspicuously earlier than some other parts of England . That is , there was no trace of Anglo-Saxons in Britain as early as the late third century , to which time the archaeological evidence for the erection of the Saxon Shore forts was beginning to point . In the face of a clear judgment from archaeology , therefore , it became impossible for a time for scholars to re-adopt the `` shore settled by '' theory . In recent years , however , a wind of change seems to be blowing through early English historical circles . The great increase in the amount of archaeological activity , and therefore information , in the years immediately preceeding and following the Second World War has brought to light data which has changed the complection of the Saxon Shore dispute . Where there were none fifteen years ago , several scholars currently are edging their way cautiously towards the acceptance of the `` shore occupied by '' position . We must , therefore , have a look at the new archaeological material and re-examine the literary and place-name evidence which bears upon the problem . What exactly are we trying to prove ? ? We know that the Saxon Shore was a phenonenon of late Roman defensive policy ; ; in other words its existence belongs to the period of Roman Britain . So whenever the Romans finally withdrew from the island , the Saxon Shore disappeared in the first decade of the fifth century . We also know that the Saxon Shore as reflected in the Notitia was created as a part of the Theodosian reorganization of Britain ( post A.D. 369 ) . My argument is that there was no Saxon Shore prior to that time even though the forts had been in existence since the time of Carausius . Therefore , what we must prove or disprove is that there were Saxons , in the broad sense in which we must construe the word , in the area of the Saxon Shore at the time it was called the Saxon Shore . That is , we must find Saxons in East Anglia , Kent , Sussex and Hampshire in the last half of the fourth century . The problem , in other words , is strictly a chronological one . In Gaul the Saxon element on its Saxon Shore was plainly visible because there the Saxons were an intrusive element in the population . In Britain , obviously , the archaeological and place-name characteristics of the Saxon Shore region are bound to be Saxon . It is a matter of trying to sort out an earlier fourth-century Saxon element from the later , fifth-century mainstream of Anglo-Saxon invasions . This , naturally , will be difficult to do since both the archaeological and place-name evidence in this period , with some fortunate exceptions , is insufficient for precise chronological purposes . It might be well to consider the literary evidence first because it can provide us with an answer to one important question ; ; namely , is the idea that there were Saxon mercenaries in England at all reasonable ? ? To do so , something was necessary beyond volunteering because there was little glamour or romance in the European war ; ; it meant instead hardship , dirt , and death . Baker gave Leonard Wood credit for the initiation of the draft of soldiers ; ; from the General's idea a chain reaction occurred . Wood took the proposal to Chief of Staff Hugh L. Scott , who passed it on to Baker a month before the actual declaration of war against Germany . The Secretary of War gave his assent after studying the history of the draft in the American Civil War as well as the British volunteer system in World War 1 . He concluded that selective service would not only prevent the disorganization of essential war industries but would avoid the undesirable moral effects of the British reliance on enlistment only -- `` where the feeling of the people was whipped into a frenzy by girls pinning white feathers on reluctant young men , orators preaching hate of the Germans , and newspapers exaggerating enemy outrages to make men enlist out of motives of revenge and retaliation '' . Baker took the plan to Wilson who said : `` Baker , this is plainly right on any ground . Start to prepare the necessary legislation so that if I am obliged to go to Congress the bills will be ready for immediate consideration '' . The result was that by secret agreement draft machinery was actually ready long before the country knew that the device was to take the place of the volunteering method which Theodore Roosevelt favored . Before the Draft Act was passed Baker had confidentially briefed governors , sheriffs , and prospective draft board members on the administration of the measure -- and the confidence was kept so well that only one newspaper learned what was going on . It was Baker , working through Provost Marshal Enoch Crowder and Major Hugh S. ( `` Old Ironpants '' ) Johnson , who arranged for a secret printing by the million of selective service blanks -- again before the Act was passed -- until corridors in the Government Printing Office were full and the basement of the Washington Post Office was stacked to the ceiling . General Crowder proposed that Regular Army officers select the draftees in cities and towns throughout the nation ; ; it was Baker who thought of lessening the shock , which conscription always brings to a country , by substituting `` Greetings from your neighbors '' for the recruiting sergeant , and registration in familiar voting places rather than at military installations . Even so , the Draft Act encountered rough sledding in its progress through the Congress . Democratic Speaker Champ Clark saw little difference between a conscript and a convict . Democrat Stanley H. Dent , Chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee , declined to introduce the bill . Democratic Floor Leader Claude Kitchin would have no part of the measure . In the judgment of Chief of Staff Scott it was ironic that the draft policy of a Democratic President , aimed at Germany , had to be pushed through the House of Representatives by the ranking minority member of the Military Affairs Committee -- a Republican Jew born in Germany ! ! He was Julius Kahn for whom the Chief of Staff thought no honor could be too great . After Kahn's death in 1924 Scott wrote : `` May he rest in peace with the eternal gratitude of his adopted country '' . In spite of powerful opposition the Draft Act finally passed Congress on May 17 , 1917 . In early June ten million young men registered by name and number . The day passed without incident in spite of the warning of Senator James A. Reed of Missouri : `` Baker , you will have the streets of our American cities running with blood on registration day '' . On July 20 , the first drawing of numbers occurred in the Senate Office Building before a distinguished group of congressmen and high Army officers . Secretary of War Baker , blindfolded , put his hand into a large glass bowl and drew the initial number of those to be called . It was 258 . A man in Mississippi wired : `` Thanks for drawing 258 -- that's me '' . He was the first of 2,800,000 called to the Army through the selective service system . It was one thing to call men to the colors ; ; it was another to house , feed , and train them . The existing Army posts were wholly inadequate . In a matter of months the War Department built thirty-two camps , each one accommodating fifty thousand men -- sixteen were under canvas in the South and sixteen with frame structures in the North . It was a gargantuan task ; ; a typical cantonment in the North had twelve hundred buildings , an electric-sewer-water system , and twenty-five miles of roads . At Camp Taylor in Kentucky a barracks was built in an hour and a half from timber that had been standing in Mississippi forests one week before . The total operation was a construction project comparable in magnitude with the Panama Canal , but in 1917 time was in short supply ; ; in three months the Army spent three-quarters as much as had been expended on the `` big Ditch '' in ten years . In later years Josephus Daniels was to claim that World War 1 , was the first in American history in which there was great concern for both the health and morals of our soldiers . It was the first American war in which the death rate from disease was lower than that from battle , due to the provision of trained medical personnel ( of the 200,000 officers , 42,000 were physicians ) , compulsory vaccination , rigorous camp sanitation , and adequate hospital facilities . To the middle of September 1918 , there had been fewer than 10,000 deaths from disease in the new army . This enviable record would have been maintained but for a great and unexpected disaster which struck the world with murderous stealth . It was the influenza pandemic of 1918-19 . The malady was popularly known as the `` Spanish flu '' from the alleged locale of its origin . The world-wide total of deaths from `` Spanish flu '' was around twenty million ; ; in the United States 300,000 succumbed to it . In mid-September 1918 , the influenza-pneumonia pandemic swept through every American military camp ; ; during the eight-week blitz attack 25,000 soldiers died from the disease and the death rate ( formerly 5 per year per 1,000 men ) increased almost fifty times to 4 per week per 1,000 men . In spite of this catastrophe the final mortality figure from disease in the American Army during World War 1 , was 15 per 1,000 per year , contrasted with 110 per 1,000 per year in the Mexican War , and 65 in the American Civil War . Both Secretary of War Baker and Secretary of Navy Daniels devoted much time and effort to the problem of providing reasonably normal and wholesome activities in camp for the millions of men who had been removed from their home environment . Their policy ran counter to the traditional idea that a good fighter was usually a libertine , and that in sex affairs `` God-given passion '' was a proof of manliness . Baker moved first ; ; six days after war was declared he appointed Raymond Fosdick chairman of the Commission on Training Camp Activities ( the CTCA ) . Fosdick , a brother of minister Harry Emerson Fosdick , was a graduate of Princeton , and a member of Phi Beta Kappa and the American Philosophical Association . His assignment was not a new one because Baker had sent him to the Mexican border in 1916 to investigate lurid newspaper stories about lack of discipline , drunkenness , and venereal disease in American military camps . Fosdick had found the installations surrounded by a battery of saloons and houses of prostitution , with filles de joie from all over the country flocking to San Antonio , Laredo , and El Paso to `` woman the cribs '' . He also ascertained that many officers were indifferent to the problem , including Commanding General Frederick Funston who gave Fosdick the nickname of `` Reverend '' . On the basis of the long chronicle of military history Funston and his brethren assumed that the issue was insoluble and that anyone interested in a mission like Fosdick's was an impractical idealist or a do-gooder . During the brief Mexican venture Fosdick's report to the Secretary recommended a definite stand by the War Department against the saloon and the excesses of prostitution . The problem involved military necessity as much as morality , for in pre-penicillin days venereal disease was a crippling disability . Fosdick insisted that a strong word was needed from Washington , and it was immediately forthcoming . Baker put the `` cribs '' and the saloons out of bounds , ordered the co-operation of military officers with local law authorities , and told communities that the troops would be moved unless wholesome conditions were restored . Both Baker and Fosdick knew that a substitute was necessary , that a verboten approach was not the real answer . They were aware that soldiers went to town , in more ways than one , because of the monotony of camp life , to find the only release available in the absence of movies , reading rooms , and playing fields with adequate athletic equipment . Both knew that when trains stopped at Texan crossroads bored soldiers would sometimes enter to ask the passengers if they had any reading material to spare , even a newspaper . There was no time in the short Mexican encounter to evolve a solution but the area provided a proving ground for new departures in the near future . When the United States entered the First World War Baker made certain that the Draft Act of 1917 prohibited the sale of liquor to men in uniform and that it provided for broad zones around the camps in which prostitution was outlawed . Even so Fosdick , as the new Chairman of the Commission on Training Camp Activities , encountered strong and vociferous opposition . New Orleans had a notorious red-light district extending over twenty-eight city blocks , and the business-minded mayor of the city journeyed to Washington to present the case for `` the God-given right of men to be men '' . In Europe , Premier Clemenceau , showing his animal proclivities as the `` Tiger of France '' , asked Pershing by letter for the creation of special houses where the sexual desires of American men could be satisfied . When Fosdick showed the letter to Baker his negative response was : `` For God's sake , Raymond , don't show this to the President or he'll stop the war '' . Ultimately Fosdick's `` Fit to fight '' slogan swept across the country and every well-known red-light district in the United States was closed , a hundred and ten of them . The result was that the rate of venereal disease in the American Army was the lowest in our military history . This was the negative side of the situation . Affirmatively Baker worked on the premise that `` young men spontaneously prefer to be decent , and that opportunities for wholesome recreation are the best possible cure for irregularities in conduct which arise from idleness and the baser temptations '' . The wholesome activities were to be provided by many organizations including the YMCA , the Knights of Columbus , the Jewish Welfare Board , the American Library Association , and the Playground and Recreation Association -- private societies which voluntarily performed the job that was taken over almost entirely by the Special Services Division of the Army itself in World War 2 . Over these voluntary agencies , in 1917-18 , the CTCA served as a co-ordinating body in carrying out what Survey called `` the most stupendous piece of social work in modern times '' . Under Fosdick the first executive officer of the CTCA was Richard Byrd , whose name in later years was to become synonymous with activities at the polar antipodes . From the point of view of popularity the best-known member of the Commission was Walter Camp , the Yale athlete whose sobriquet was `` the father of American football '' . He was placed in charge of athletics , and among other things adapted the type of calisthenics known as the daily dozen . The CTCA program of activities was profuse : William Farnum and Mary Pickford on the screen , Elsie Janis and Harry Lauder on the stage , books provided by the American Library Association , full equipment for games and sports -- except that no `` bones '' were furnished for the all-time favorite pastime played on any floor and known as `` African golf '' . The CTCA distributed a khaki-bound songbook that provided the impetus for spirited renditions of the selections found therein , plus a number of others whose lyrics were more earthy -- from `` Johnny Get Your Gun '' to `` Keep The Home Fires Burning '' to `` Mademoiselle From Armentieres '' . In the imagination of the nineteenth century the Greek tragedians and Shakespeare stand side by side , their affinity transcending all the immense contrarieties of historical circumstance , religious belief , and poetic form . We no longer use the particular terms of Lessing and Victor Hugo . But we abide by their insight . The word `` tragedy '' encloses for us in a single span both the Greek and the Elizabethan example . The sense of relationship overreaches the historical truth that Shakespeare may have known next to nothing of the actual works of Aeschylus , Sophocles , and Euripides . It transcends the glaring fact that the Elizabethans mixed tragedy and comedy whereas the Greeks kept the two modes severely distinct . It overcomes our emphatic awareness of the vast difference in the shape and fabric of the two languages and styles of dramatic presentation . The intimations of a related spirit and ordering of human values are stronger than any sense of disparity . Comparable visions of life are at work in Antigone and Romeo And Juliet . We see at once what Victor Hugo means when he calls Macbeth a northern scion of the house of Atreus . Elsinore seems to lie in a range of Mycenae , and the fate of Orestes resounds in that of Hamlet . The hounds of hell search out their quarry in Apollo's sanctuary as they do in the tent of Richard 3 . Oedipus and Lear attain similar insights by virtue of similar blindness . It is not between Euripides and Shakespeare that the western mind turns away from the ancient tragic sense of life . It is after the late seventeenth century . I say the late seventeenth century because Racine ( whom Lessing did not really know ) stands on the far side of the chasm . The image of man which enters into force with Aeschylus is still vital in Phedre and Athalie . It is the triumph of rationalism and secular metaphysics which marks the point of no return . Shakespeare is closer to Sophocles than he is to Pope and Voltaire . To say this is to set aside the realness of time . But it is true , nevertheless . The modes of the imagination implicit in Athenian tragedy continued to shape the life of the mind until the age of Descartes and Newton . It is only then that the ancient habits of feeling and the classic orderings of material and psychological experience were abandoned . With the Discours de la methode and the Principia the things undreamt of in Horatio's philosophy seem to pass from the world . In Greek tragedy as in Shakespeare , mortal actions are encompassed by forces which transcend man . The reality of Orestes entails that of the Furies ; ; the Weird Sisters wait for the soul of Macbeth . We cannot conceive of Oedipus without a Sphinx , nor of Hamlet without a Ghost . The shadows cast by the personages of Greek and Shakespearean drama lengthen into a greater darkness . And the entirety of the natural world is party to the action . The thunderclaps over the sacred wood at Colonus and the storms in King Lear are caused by more than weather . In tragedy , lightning is a messenger . But it can no longer be so once Benjamin Franklin ( the incarnation of the new rational man ) has flown a kite to it . The tragic stage is a platform extending precariously between heaven and hell . Those who walk on it may encounter at any turn ministers of grace or damnation . Oedipus and Lear instruct us how little of the world belongs to man . Mortality is the pacing of a brief and dangerous watch , and to all sentinels , whether at Elsinore or on the battlements at Mycenae , the coming of dawn has its breath of miracle . It banishes the night wanderers to fire or repose . But at the touch of Hume and Voltaire the noble or hideous visitations which had haunted the mind since Agamemnon's blood cried out for vengeance , disappeared altogether or took tawdry refuge among the gaslights of melodrama . Modern roosters have lost the art of crowing restless spirits back to Purgatory . In Athens , in Shakespeare's England , and at Versailles , the hierarchies of worldly power were stable and manifest . The wheel of social life spun around the royal or aristocratic centre . From it , spokes of order and degree led to the outward rim of the common man . Tragedy presumes such a configuration . Its sphere is that of royal courts , dynastic quarrels , and vaulting ambitions . The same metaphors of swift ascent and calamitous decline apply to Oedipus and Macbeth because they applied also to Alcibiades and Essex . And the fate of such men has tragic relevance because it is public . Agamemnon , Creon , and Medea perform their tragic actions before the eyes of the polis . Similarly the sufferings of Hamlet , Othello , or Phedre engage the fortunes of the state . They are enacted at the heart of the body politic . Hence the natural setting of tragedy is the palace gate , the public square , or the court chamber . Greek and Elizabethan life and , to a certain extent , the life of Versailles shared this character of intense `` publicity '' . Princes and factions clashed in the open street and died on the open scaffold . With the rise to power of the middle class the centre of gravity in human affairs shifted from the public to the private . The art of Defoe and Richardson is founded on an awareness of this great change . Heretofore an action had possessed the breadth of tragedy only if it involved high personages and if it occurred in the public view . Behind the tragic hero stands the chorus , the crowd , or the observant courtier . In the eighteenth century there emerges for the first time the notion of a private tragedy ( or nearly for the first time , there having been a small number of Elizabethan domestic tragedies such as the famous Arden Of Feversham ) . In La Nouvelle-Heloise and Werther tragedy is made intimate . And private tragedy became the chosen ground not of drama , but of the new , unfolding art of the novel . The novel was not only the presenter of the new , secular , rationalistic , private world of the middle class . It served also as a literary form exactly appropriate to the fragmented audience of modern urban culture . I have said before how difficult it is to make any precise statements with regard to the character of the Greek and Elizabethan public . But one major fact seems undeniable . Until the advent of rational empiricism the controlling habits of the western mind were symbolic and allegoric . Available evidence regarding the natural world , the course of history , and the varieties of human action were translated into imaginative designs or mythologies . Classic mythology and Christianity are such architectures of the imagination . They order the manifold levels of reality and moral value along an axis of being which extends from brute matter to the immaculate stars . There had not yet supervened between understanding and expression the new languages of mathematics and scientific formulas . The poet was by definition a realist , his imaginings and parables being natural organizations of reality . And in these organizations certain primal notions played a radiant part , radiant both in the sense of giving light and of being a pole toward which all perspectives converge . I mean such concepts as the presence of the supernatural in human affairs , the sacraments of grace and divine retribution , the idea of preordainment ( the oracle over Oedipus , the prophecy of the witches to Macbeth , or God's covenant with His people in Athalie ) . I refer to the notion that the structure of society is a microcosm of the cosmic design and that history conforms to patterns of justice and chastisement as if it were a morality play set in motion by the gods for our instruction . These conceptions and the manner in which they were transposed into poetry or engendered by poetic form are intrinsic to western life from the time of Aeschylus to that of Shakespeare . And although they were , as I have indicated , under increasing strain at the time of Racine , they are still alive in his theatre . They are the essential force behind the conventions of tragedy . They are as decisively present in the Oresteia and Oedipus as in Macbeth , King Lear , and Phedre . After the seventeenth century the audience ceased to be an organic community to which these ideas and their attendant habits of figurative language would be natural or immediately familiar . Concepts such as grace , damnation , purgation , blasphemy , or the chain of being , which are everywhere implicit in classic and Shakespearean tragedy , lose their vitality . They become philosophic abstractions of a private and problematic relevance , or mere catchwords in religious customs which had in them a diminishing part of active belief . After Shakespeare the master spirits of western consciousness are no longer the blind seers , the poets , or Orpheus performing his art in the face of hell . They are Descartes , Newton , and Voltaire . And their chroniclers are not the dramatic poets but the prose novelists . The romantics were the immediate inheritors of this tremendous change . They were not yet prepared to accept it as irremediable . Rousseau's primitivism , the anti-Newtonian mythology of Blake , Coleridge's organic metaphysics , Victor Hugo's image of the poets as the Magi , and Shelley's `` unacknowledged legislators '' are related elements in the rear-guard action fought by the romantics against the new scientific rationalism . From this action sprang the idea of somehow uniting Greek and Shakespearean drama into a new total form , capable of restoring to life the ancient moral and poetic responses . The dream of achieving a synthesis between the Sophoclean and the Shakespearean genius inspired the ambitions of poets and composers from the time of Shelley and Victor Hugo to that of Bayreuth . It could not really be fulfilled . The conventions into which the romantics tried to breath life no longer corresponded to the realities of thought and feeling . But the attempt itself produced a number of brilliant works , and these form a transition from the early romantic period to the new age of Ibsen and Chekhov . The wedding of the Hellenic to the northern genius was one of the dominant motifs in Goethe's thought . His Italian journey was a poet's version of those perennial thrusts across the Alps of the German emperors of the Middle Ages . The dream of a descent into the gardens of the south always drew German ambitions toward Rome and Sicily . Goethe asks in Wilhelm Meister whether we know the land where the lemon trees flower , and the light of the Mediterranean glows through Torquato Tasso and the Roman Elegies . Goethe believed that the Germanic spirit , with its grave strength but flagrant streaks of brutality and intolerance , should be tempered with the old sensuous wisdom and humanism of the Hellenic . On the narrower ground of poetic form , he felt that in the drama of the future the Greek conception of tragic fate should be joined to the Shakespearean vision of tragic will . The wager between God and Satan brings on the destiny of Faust , but Faust assumes his role voluntarily . The third Act of Faust 2 , is a formal celebration of the union between the Germanic and the classic , between the spirit of Euripides and that of romantic drama . The motif of Faust's love for Helen of Troy goes back to the sources of the Faustian legend . It tells us of the ancient human desire to see the highest wisdom joined to the highest sensual beauty . There can be no greater magic than to wrest from death her in whom the flesh was all , in whom beauty was entirely pure because it was entirely corruptible . It is thus that the brightness of Helen passes through Marlowe's Faustus . Goethe used the fable to more elaborate ends . Faust rescuing Helen from Menelaus' vengeance is the genius of renaissance Europe restoring to life the classic tradition . The necromantic change from the palace at Sparta to Faust's Gothic castle directs us to the aesthetic meaning of the myth -- the translation of antique drama into Shakespearean and romantic guise . This translation , or rather the fusion of the two ideals , creates the Gesamtkunstwerke , the `` total art form '' . The Bishop of Gloucester described the elder Thomas in 1577 as the richest recusant in his diocese , worth five hundred pounds a year in lands and goods . When Quiney and William Parsons wrote to Greville in 1593 asking his consent in the election for bailiff , they sent the letter to Mr. William Sawnders , attendant on the worshipful Mr. Thomas Bushell at Marston . Mr. Bushell was mentioned in 1602 in the will of Joyce Hobday , widow of a Stratford glover . Thomas the elder married twice , had seventeen children , and died in 1615 . His daughter Elinor married Quiney's son Adrian in 1613 , and his son Henry married Mary Lane of Stratford in 1609 . His son Thomas , aged fifteen when he entered Oxford in 1582 , married as his first wife Margaret , sister of Sir Edward Greville . Bridges , a son by his second wife , was christened at Pebworth in 1607 , but Thomas the younger was living at Packwood two years later and sold Broad Marston manor in 1622 . A third Thomas Bushell ( 1594-1674 ) , `` much loved '' by Bacon , called himself `` The Superlative Prodigall '' in The First Part of Youths Errors ( 1628 ) and became an expert on silver mines and on the art of running into debt . Edward Greville , born about 1565 , had inherited Milcote on the execution of his father Lodowick for murder in 1589 . He refused his consent to the election of Quiney as bailiff in 1592 , but gave it at the request of the recorder , his cousin Sir Fulke Greville . The corporation entertained him for dinner at Quiney's house in 1596/7 , with wine and sugar sent by the bailiff , Sturley . At Milcote on November 3 , 1597 , the aldermen asked him to support their petition for a new charter . Sturley wrote to Quiney that Sir Edward `` gave his allowance and liking thereof , and affied unto us his best endeavour , so that his rights be preserved '' , and that `` Sir Edward saith we shall not be at any fault for money for prosecuting the cause , for himself will procure it and lay it down for us for the time '' . Greville proposed Quiney as the fittest man `` for the following of the cause and to attend him in the matter '' , and at his suggestion the corporation allowed Quiney two shillings a day . `` If you can firmly make the good knight sure to pleasure our Corporation '' , Sturley wrote , `` besides that ordinary allowance for your diet you shall have 20 for recompence '' . In his letter mentioning Shakespeare on January 24 , 1597/8 , Sturley asked Quiney especially that `` theare might ( be ) bi Sir Ed. Grev. some meanes made to the Knightes of the Parliament for an ease and discharge of such taxes and subsedies wherewith our towne is like to be charged , and I assure u I am in great feare and doubte bi no meanes hable to paie . Sir Ed. Gre. is gonne to Brestowe and from thence to Lond. as I heare , who verie well knoweth our estates and wil be willinge to do us ani good '' . The knights for Warwickshire in this parliament , which ended its session on February 9 , were Fulke Greville ( the poet ) and William Combe of Warwick , as Fulke Greville and Edward Greville had been in 1593 . The corporation voted on September 27 , 1598 , that Quiney should ride to London about the suit to Sir John Fortescue , chancellor of the Exchequer , for discharging of the tax and subsidy . He had been in London for several weeks when he wrote to Shakespeare on October 25 . Sturley on November 4 answered a letter from Quiney written on October 25 which imported , wrote Sturley , `` that our countriman Mr. Wm. Shak. would procure us monei : which I will like of as I shall heare when , wheare & howe : and I prai let not go that occasion if it mai sort to ani indifferent condicions . Allso that if monei might be had for 30 or 40 a lease & might be procured '' . Sturley quoted Quiney as having written on November 1 that if he had `` more monei presente much might be done to obtaine our Charter enlargd , ij faires more , with tole of corne , bestes , and sheepe , and a matter of more valewe then all that '' . Sturley thought that this matter might be `` the rest of the tithes and the College houses and landes in our towne '' . He suggested offering half to Sir Edward , fearing lest `` he shall thinke it to good for us and procure it for himselfe , as he served us the last time '' . This refers to what had happened after the Earl of Warwick died in 1590 , when the town petitioned Burghley for the right to name the vicar and schoolmaster and other privileges but Greville bought the lordship for himself . Sturley's allusion probably explains why Greville took out the patent in the names of Best and Wells , for Sir Anthony Ashley described Best as `` a scrivener within Temple Bar , that deals in many matters for my L. Essex '' through Sir Gelly Merrick , especially in `` causes that he would not be known of '' . Adrian Quiney wrote to his son Richard on October 29 and again perhaps the next day , since the bearer of the letter , the bailiff , was expected to reach London on November 1 . In his second letter the old mercer advised his son `` to bye some such warys as yow may selle presentlye with profet . Yff yow bargen with Wm. Sha. ( so in the MS ) or Receave money ther or brynge your money home yow maye see howe knite stockynges be sold ther ys gret byinge of them at Aysshom . Wherefore I thynke yow maye doo good yff yow can have money '' . This seems to refer , not to the loan Richard had asked for , but to a proposed bargain with Shakespeare . Richard Quiney the younger , a schoolboy of eleven , wrote a letter in Latin asking his father to buy copybooks ( `` chartaceos libellos ) '' ) for him and his brother . His mother Bess , who could not write herself , reminded her husband through Sturley to buy the apron he had promised her and `` a suite of hattes for 5 boies the yongst lined & trimmed with silke '' ( for John , only a year old ) . A letter signed `` Isabell Bardall '' entreated `` Good Cozen '' Quiney to find her stepson Adrian , son of George Bardell , a place in London with some handicraftsman . William Parsons and William Walford , drapers , asked Quiney to see to business matters in London . Daniel Baker deluged his `` Unckle Quyne '' with requests to pay money for him to drapers in Watling Street and at the Two Cats in Canning Street . His letter of October 26 named two of the men about whom Quiney had written to Shakespeare the day before . Baker wrote : `` I tooke order with Sr. E. Grevile for the payment of Ceartaine monei beefore his going towardes London . & synce I did write unto him to dessier him to paie 10 for mee which standeth mee greatly uppon to have paide . & 20 more Mr. Peeter Rowswell tooke order with his master to paie for mee '' . He asked Quiney to find out whether the money had been paid and , if not , to send to the lodging of Sir Edward and entreat him to pay what he owed . Baker added : `` I pray you delivre these inclosed Letters And Comend mee to Mr. Rychard Mytton whoe I know will ffreind mee for the payment of this monei '' . Further letters in November mention that Sir Edward paid forty pounds . Stratford's petition to the queen declared that two great fires had burnt two hundred houses in the town , with household goods , to the value of twelve thousand pounds . The chancellor of the Exchequer wrote on the petition : `` in myn opinion it is very resonable and conscionable for hir maiestie to graunt in relief of this towne twise afflicted and almost wasted by fire '' . The queen agreed on December 17 , a warrant was signed on January 27 , and the Exchequer paid Quiney his expenses on February 27 , 1598/9 . He listed what he had spent for `` My own diet in London eighteen weeks , in which I was sick a month ; ; my mare at coming up 14 days ; ; another I bought there to bring me home 7 weeks ; ; and I was six days going thither and coming homewards ; ; all which cost me at the least 20 pounds '' . He was allowed forty-four pounds in all , including fees to the masters of requests , Mr. Fanshawe of the Exchequer , the solicitor general , and other officials and their clerks . If he borrowed money from Shakespeare or with his help , he would now have been able to repay the loan . Since more is known about Quiney than about any other acquaintance of Shakespeare in Stratford , his career may be followed to its sudden end in 1602 . During 1598 and 1599 he made `` manye Guiftes of myne owne provision bestowed uppon Cowrtiers & others for the better effectinge of our suites in hande '' . He was in London `` searching records for our town's causes '' in 1600 with young Henry Sturley , the assistant schoolmaster . When Sir Edward Greville enclosed the town commons on the Bancroft , Quiney and others leveled his hedges on January 21 , 1600/1 , and were charged with riot by Sir Edward . He also sued them for taking toll of grain at their market . Accompanied by `` Master Greene our solicitor '' ( Thomas Greene of the Middle Temple , Shakespeare's `` cousin '' ) , Quiney tried to consult Sir Edward Coke , attorney general , and gave money to a clerk and a doorkeeper `` that we might have access to their master for his counsel butt colde nott have him att Leasure by the reason of thees trobles '' ( the Essex rising on February 8 ) . He set down that `` I gave Mr. Greene a pynte of muskadell and a roll of bread that last morning I went to have his company to Master Attorney '' . After returning Stratford he drew up a defense of the town's right to toll corn and the office of collecting it , and his list of suggested witnesses included his father and Shakespeare's father . No one , he wrote , took any corn of Greville's , for his bailiff of husbandry `` swore a greate oathe thatt who soe came to put hys hande into hys sackes for anye corne shuld leave hys hande behynde hym '' . Quiney was in London again in June , 1601 , and in November , when he rode up , as Shakespeare must often have done , by way of Oxford , High Wycombe , and Uxbridge , and home through Aylesbury and Banbury . After Quiney was elected bailiff in September , 1601 , without Greville's approval , Greene wrote him that Coke had promised to be of counsel for Stratford and had advised `` that the office of bayly may be exercised as it is taken upon you , ( Sr. Edwardes his consent not beinge hadd to the swearinge of you ) '' . Asked by the townsmen to cease his suit , Greville had answered that `` hytt shulde coste hym 500 first & sayed it must be tried ether before my Lorde Anderson in the countrey or his uncle Ffortescue in the exchequer with whom he colde more prevaile then we '' . The corporation proposed Chief Justice Anderson for an arbiter , sending him a gift of sack and claret . Lady Greville , daughter of the late Lord Chancellor Bromley and niece of Sir John Fortescue , was offered twenty pounds by the townsmen to make peace ; ; she `` labored & thought she shuld effecte '' it but her husband said that `` we shuld wynne it by the sworde '' . His servant Robin Whitney threatened Quiney , who had Whitney bound to `` the good abaringe '' to keep the peace . A report of Sr. Edw Grevyles minaces to the Baileefe Aldermen & Burgesses of Stratforde '' tells how Quiney was injured by Greville's men : `` in the tyme Mr. Ryc' Quyney was bayleefe ther came some of them whoe beinge druncke fell to braweling in ther hosts howse wher thei druncke & drewe ther dagers uppon the hoste : att a faier tyme the Baileefe being late abroade to see the towne in order & comminge by in hurley burley came into the howse & commawnded the peace to be kept butt colde nott prevayle & in hys endevor to sticle the brawle had his heade grevouselye brooken by one of hys ( Greville's ) men whom nether hymselfe ( Greville ) punnished nor wolde suffer to be punnished but with a shewe to turne them awaye & enterteyned agayne '' . The fall of Rome , the discovery of precious metals , and the Protestant Reformation were all links and could only be explained and understood by comprehending the links that preceded and those that followed . Often the historian must consider the use of intuition or instinct by those individuals or nations which he is studying . Unconsciously , governments or races or institutions may enter into some undertaking without fully realizing why they are doing so . They react in obedience to an instinct or urge which has itself been impelled by natural law . A court may strike down a law on the basis of an intuitive feeling that the law is inimical to the numerical majority . A nation may go to war on some trifling pretext , when in reality it may have been guided by an unconscious instinct that its very life was at stake . When the historian encounters a situation in which he can perceive no visible cause and effect sequence , he should be alert to intuition and unconscious instinct as possible guides . Adams firmly contended that the historian must never underrate the impact of the geographical environment on history . Here was another indispensable tool . Indeed , he concluded that `` geographical conditions have exercised a great , possibly a preponderating , influence over man's destiny '' . The failure of Greece to reach the imperial destiny that Periclean Athens had seemed to promise was almost directly attributable to her physical conformation . All areas of history were either favorably or adversely affected by the geographical environment , and no respectable historian could pursue the study of history without a thorough knowledge of geography . Brooks Adams was consistent in his admonishments to historians about the necessary tools or insights they needed to possess . However , as a practicing historian , he , himself , has left few clues to the amount of professional scholarship that he used when writing history . In fact , if judgments are to be rendered upon the soundness of his historicism , they must be based on scanty evidence . What evidence is available would seem to indicate that Brooks , unlike his older brother Henry , had most of the methodological vices usually found in the amateur . A credulousness , a distaste for documentation , an uncritical reliance on contemporary accounts , and a proneness to assume a theory as true before adequate proof was provided were all evidences of his failure to comprehend the use of the scientific method or to evaluate the responsibilities of the historian to his reading public . This is not to assume that his work was without merit , but the validity of his assumptions concerning the meaning of history must always be considered against this background of an unprofessional approach . His credulity is perhaps best illustrated in his introduction to The Emancipation Of Massachusetts , which purports to examine the trials of Moses and to draw a parallel between the leader of the Israelite exodus from Egypt and the leadership of the Puritan clergy in colonial New England . Much criticism has been leveled at this rather forced analogy , but what is equally significant is Adams' complete acceptance of the Biblical record as `` good and trustworthy history '' . In light of the scholarly reappraisals engendered by the higher criticism this is a most remarkable statement , particularly coming from one who was well known for his antifundamentalist views . The desire to substantiate a thesis at the expense of sound research technique smacks more of the propagandist than the historian . A similar amateurish characteristic is revealed in Adams' failure to check the accuracy and authenticity of his informational sources . If he found data that fitted his general plan , he used it and counted his sources trustworthy . Conversely , if statistics were uncovered which contradicted a cherished theory , the sources were denounced as faulty . Such manipulations are frequently encountered in his essay on the suppression of the monasteries during the English reformation . Adams depended largely on the dispatches of foreign ambassadors and observers in England , claiming that the reports of such agents had to be accurate because there were no newspapers . This is certainly an irrational dogmatism , in which the modern mind attempts to understand the spirit of the sixteenth century on twentieth-century terms . Moreover , he rejects the contemporary accounts of Englishmen , casually adjudging them to be distorted by prejudice because `` the opinions of Englishmen are of no great value '' . What is exposited by this observation is not the inherent prejudices of Englishmen but the Anglophobia of Brooks Adams . In all fairness it must be admitted that Adams made no pretense at being an impartial historian . Impartiality to him meant an unwillingness to generalize and to search for a synthesis . He deplored the impact of German historiography on the writing of history , terming it a `` dismal monster '' . Ranke and his disciples had reduced history to a profession of dullness ; ; Brooks Adams preferred the chronicles of Froissart or the style and theorizing of Edward Gibbon , for at least they took a stand on the issues about which they wrote . He wrote eloquently to William James that impartial history was not only impossible but undesirable . If the historian was convinced of his own correctness , then he should not allow his vision to become fogged by disturbing facts . It was history that must be in error , not the historian . It was this basic trait that separated Adams from the ranks of professional historians and led him to commit time and time again what was his most serious offense against the historical method -- namely , the tendency to assume the truth of an hypothesis before submitting it to the test of facts . All of Adams' work reflects this dogmatic characteristic . No page seems to be complete without the statement of at least one unproved generalization . One example of this was his assertion that `` all servile revolts must be dealt with by physical force '' . There is no explanation of terms nor a qualification that most such revolts have been dealt with by force -- only a bald dogmatism that they must , because of some undefined compulsion , be so repelled . On matters of race he was similarly inflexible : `` Most of the modern Latin races seem to have inherited the rigidity of the Roman mind '' . He cites the French Revolution as typifying this rigidity but makes no mention of the Italians , who have been able to adapt to all types of circumstances . He pontificates that `` one of the first signs of advancing civilization is the fall in the value of women in men's eyes '' . It made no difference that most evidence points to an opposite conclusion . For Adams had made up his mind before all the facts were available . All critics of Adams and his methods have observed this particular deficiency . J. T. Shotwell was appalled by such spurious history as that which attributed the fall of the Carolingian empire to the woolen trade , and he urged Adams to `` transform his essay into a real history , embodying not merely those facts which fit into his theory , but also the modifications and exceptions '' . A. M. Wergeland called the Adams method literally antihistorical , while Clive Day maintained that the assumptions were not confined to theories alone but were also applicable to straight factual evidence . Moreover , stated Day , `` He always omits facts which tend to disprove his hypothesis '' . Even D. A. Wasson , who compared The Emancipation Of Massachusetts to the lifting of a fog from ancient landscapes , was also forced to admit the methodological deficiencies of the author . In summary , Brooks Adams felt that the nature of history was order and that the order so discovered was as much subject to historical laws as the forces of nature . Moreover , he believed that most professional historians lacked some of the essential instruments for a proper study of history . However , despite the insight of many of his observations , his own conclusions are open to suspicion because of his failure to employ at all times the correct research methods . This should not prejudice an evaluation of his findings , but they were not the findings of a completely impartial investigator . What was perhaps more important than his concept of the nature of history and the historical method were those forces which shaped the direction of his thought . In the final analysis his contribution to American historiography was founded on almost intuitive insights into religion , economics , and Darwinism , the three factors which conditioned his search for a law of history . Religion without supernaturalism Brooks Adams considered religion as an extremely significant manifestation of man's fear of the unknown . But it was nothing more than that . Religion and the churches were institutions which had been created by man , not God . He did not deny God ; ; he simply did not believe that a Creator intervened or interfered in human affairs . The historian need not be concerned with the philosophical problems suggested by religion . There was no evidence , either of a positive or negative type , of the actions of a Divine Being in this world ; ; and , since the historian should only be interested in strictly terrestrial activity , his research should eliminate the supernatural . Furthermore , he must regard religion as the expression of human forces . Certainly , he must recognize its power and attempt to ascertain its influence on the flow of history , but he must not confuse the natural and the mundane with the divine . Adams was not breaking new ground when he claimed that the worship of an unseen power was in reality a reflection of man's inability to cope with his environment . Students of anthropology and comparative religion had long been aware that there was , indeed , a direct connection . But Adams was one of the first to suggest that this human incompetence was the only motivating factor behind religion . It was this fear which explained the development of a priestly caste whose function in society was to mollify and appease the angry deities . To keep themselves entrenched in power , the priests were forced to demonstrate their unique status through the miracle . It was the use of the supernatural that kept them in business . The German barbarians of the fourth century offered an excellent example : `` The Germans in the fourth century were a very simple race , who comprehended little of natural laws , and who therefore referred phenomena they did not understand to supernatural intervention . This intervention could only be controlled by priests , and thus the invasions caused a rapid rise in the influence of the sacred class . The power of every ecclesiastical organization has always rested on the miracle , and the clergy have always proved their divine commission as did Elijah '' . Adams contended that once such a special class had been created it became a vested interest and sought to maintain itself by assuming exclusive control over the relationships between God and man . Thus , the Church was born and because of its intrinsic character was soon identified as a conservative institution , determined to resist the forces of change , to identify itself with the political rulers , and to maintain a kind of splendid isolation from the masses . Doctrine was not only mysterious ; ; it was also sacred , `` and no believer in an inspired church could tolerate having her canons examined as we should examine human laws '' . These basic ideas concerning the nature of religion were , Adams believed , some of the major keys to the understanding of history and the movement of society . The dark views about the Puritans found in The Emancipation Of Massachusetts were never altered . Despite their adherence to the status quo , the forces of organized religion were compelled to make adjustments as increasing civilization augmented human knowledge . In The Law Of Civilization And Decay Brooks Adams traced this evolution , always pointing to the fact that although the forms became more rational , the substance remained unchanged . The relic worship and monasticism of the Middle Ages were more advanced forms than were primitive fetish worship and nature myths . Yet , the idea imbedded in each was identical : to surround the unknown with mystery and to isolate that class which had been given special dominion over the secrets of God . To Adams that age in which religion exercised power over the entire culture of the race was one of imagination , and it is largely the admiration he so obviously held for such eras that betrays a peculiar religiosity -- a sentiment he would have probably denied . Stephens had written his classic `` incidents of travel '' about these regions a hundred years before , and Catherwood , who had studied Piranesi in London and the great ruins of Egypt and Greece , had drawn the splendid illustrations that accompanied the text . Catherwood , an architect in New York , had been forgotten , like Stephens , and Victor reconstructed their lives as one reconstructs , for a museum , a dinosaur from two or three petrified bones . He had unearthed Stephens's letters in a New Jersey farmhouse and he discovered Stephens's unmarked grave in an old cemetery on the east side of New York , where the great traveller had been hastily buried during a cholera epidemic . Victor had been stirred by my account of him in Makers And Finders , for Stephens was one of the lost writers whom Melville had seen in his childhood and whom I was bent on resurrecting . Victor had led an adventurous life . His metier was the American tropics , and he had lived all over Latin America and among the primitive tribes on the Amazon river . Well he knew the sleepless nights , the howling sore-ridden dogs and the biting insects in the villages of the Kofanes and Huitotoes . He had not yet undertaken the great exploit of his later years , the rediscovery of the ancient Inca highway , the route of Pizarro in Peru , but he had climbed to the original El Dorado , the Andean lake of Guatemala , and he had scaled the southern Sierra Nevada with its Tibetan-like people and looked into the emerald mines of Muzo . As a naturalist living for two years at the headwaters of the Amazon , he had collected specimens for Mexican museums , and he had taken to the London zoo a live quetzal , the sacred bird of the old Mayans . In fact , he had raised quetzal birds in his camp in the forest of Ecuador . Moreover , he had spent six months on the Galapagos islands , among the great turtles that Captain Cook had found there , and now and then he would disappear into some small island of the West Indies . Victor's book on John Lloyd Stephens was largely written in my study in the house at Weston . I had had my name taken out of the telephone book , and this was partly because of a convict who had been discharged from Sing Sing and who called me night after night . He said he was a friend of Heywood Broun who had run a free employment bureau for several months during the depression , but the generous Broun to whom I wrote did not know his name and I somehow conceived the morbid notion that the man in question was prowling round the house . But one day came the voice of a man I had known when he was a boy , and I later remembered that this boy , thirty years before , had struck me as coming to no good . There had been something sinister about him that warned me against him , -- I had never felt that way about any other boy , -- but when he uttered his name on the telephone I had forgotten this and I was glad to do what he asked of me . He was a captain , he said , in the army , and on the train to New York his purse and all his money had been stolen , and would I lend him twenty-five dollars to be given him at the General Delivery window ? ? Never hearing from him again , I remembered the little boy of whom I had had such doubts when he was ten years old . We lived for a while in a movie melodrama with a German cook and her son who turned out to be Nazis . Finally we got them out of the house , after the boy had run away four times looking for other Nazis , threatening to murder village schoolchildren and bragging that he was to be the next Fuhrer . Then he began to have epileptic fits . We found that a charitable society in New York had a long case-history of the two ; ; and they agreed to see that the tragic pair would not put poison in anybody else's soup . To the Weston house came once William Allen Neilson , the president of Smith College who had been one of my old professors and who still called me `` Boy '' when I was sixty . It reminded me of my other professor , Edward Kennard Rand , of whom I had been so fond when I was at Harvard , the great mediaevalist and classical scholar who had asked me to call him `` Ken '' , saying , `` Age counts for nothing among those who have learned to know life sub specie aeternitatis '' . I had always thought of that lovable man as many years older than myself , although he was perhaps only twenty years older , and he confirmed my feeling , along with the feeling of both my sons , that teachers of the classics are invariably endearing . I must have written to say how much I had enjoyed his fine book The Building Of Eternal Rome , and I found he had not regretted giving me the highest mark in his old course on the later Latin poets , although in my final examination I had ignored the questions and filled the bluebook with a comparison of Propertius and Coleridge . He had written to me about a dinner he had had with the Benedictine monks at St. Anselm's Priory in Washington . There had been reading at table , especially from two books , Pope Gregory The Great's account of St. Scholastica in his Dialogues and my own The World Of Washington Irving . He said , `` Some have criticized your book as being neither literary criticism nor history . Of course it was not meant to be . Some have felt that Washington Irving comes out rather slimly , but let them look at the title of the book '' . He felt as I felt about this best of all my books , that it was `` really tops '' . Two or three times , C. C. Burlingham came to lunch with us in Weston , that wonderful man who lived to be more than a hundred years old and whose birthplace had been my Wall Street suburb . His reading ranged from Agatha Christie to The Book Of Job and he had an insatiable interest in his fellow-creatures , while his letters were full of gossip about new politicians and old men of letters with whom he had been intimately thrown six decades before . I could never forget the gaiety with which , when he was both blind and deaf , he let me lead him around his rooms to look at some of the pictures ; ; and once when he came to see us in New York he walked away in a rainstorm , unwilling to hear of a taxi or even an umbrella , although he was at the time ninety years old . There were several men of ninety or more whom I knew first or last , all of whom were still productive and most of whom knew one another as if they had naturally come together at the apex of their lives . I never met John Dewey , whose style was a sort of verbal fog and who had written asking me to go to Mexico with him when he was investigating the cause of Trotsky ; ; but I liked to think of him at ninety swimming and working at Key West long after Hemingway had moved to Cuba . At Lee Simonson's house , I had dined with Edith Hamilton , the nonogenarian rationalist and the charming scholar who had a great popular success with The Greek Way . Then there was Mark Howe and there was Henry Dwight Sedgwick , an accomplished man of letters who wrote in the spirit of Montaigne and produced in the end a formidable body of work . I saw Sedgwick often before his death at ninety-five , -- he had remarried at the age of ninety , -- and he asked me , when once I returned from Rome , if I knew the Cavallinis in the church of St. Cecilia in Trastevere . I had to confess that I had missed these frescoes , recently discovered , that he had studied in his eighties . Sedgwick had chosen to follow the philosophy of Epicurus whom , with his followers , Dante put in hell ; ; but he defended the doctrine in The Art Of Happiness , and what indeed could be said against the Epicurean virtues , health , frugality , privacy , culture and friendship ? ? Of Mark Antony De Wolfe Howe the philosopher Whitehead said the Earth's first visitors to Mars should be persons likely to make a good impression , and when he was asked , `` Whom would you send '' ? ? He replied , `` My first choice would be Mark Howe '' . This friend of many years came once to visit us in the house at Weston . Then I spoke at the ninetieth birthday party of W. E. Burghardt Du Bois , who embarked on a fictional trilogy at eighty-nine and who , with The Crisis , had created a Negro intelligentsia that had never existed in America before him . As their interpreter and guide , he had broken with Tuskegee and become a spokesman of the coloured people of the world . Mr. Burlingham , -- `` C.C.B. '' -- wrote to me once about an old friend of mine , S. K. Ratcliffe , whom I had first met in London in 1914 and who also came out for a week-end in Weston . `` Did you ever know a man with greater zest for information ? ? And his memory , like an elephant's , stored with precise knowledge of men and things and happenings '' . His wife , Katie , `` as gay as a lark and as lively as a gazelle '' , -- she was then seventy-six , -- had `` a sense of humour that has been denied S.K. , but neither has any aesthetic perceptions . People and books are enough for them '' . S.K. was visiting C.C.B. and , not waiting for breakfast , he was off to the University Club , where he spent hours writing obituaries of living Americans for The Manchester Guardian or The Glasgow Herald . Later , rising ninety , he was beset by publishers for the story of his life and miracles , as he put it , but , calling himself the Needy Knife-grinder , he had spent his time writing short articles and long letters and could not get even a small popular book done . Then , all but blind , he said there was nothing in Back to Methuselah -- , -- `` G.B.S. ought to have known that '' , -- and `` I look at my bookshelves despairingly , knowing that I can have nothing more to do with them '' . However , at eighty-five , he had still been busy writing articles , reviewing and speaking , and I had never before known an Englishman who had visited and lectured in three quarters of the United States . Finally , colleges and clubs took the line that speakers from England were not wanted any longer , even speakers like S.K. , so unlike the novelists and poets who had patronized the Americans for many years . With their facile generalizations about the United States , these mediocrities , as they often were , had been great successes . While S.K. did not like Dylan Thomas , I liked his poems very much , but I made the mistake of telling Dylan Thomas so , whereupon he said to me , `` I suppose you think you know all about me '' . I should have replied , `` I probably know something about the best part of you '' . But I only thought of that in the middle of the night . Many years later I went to see S.K. in England , where he was living at Whiteleaf , near Aylesbury , and he showed me beside his cottage there the remains of the road on which Boadicea is supposed to have travelled . He was convinced that George Orwell's 1984 was nearly all wrong as it applied to England , which was `` driving forward into uncharted waters '' , with the danger of a new tyranny ahead . `` But however we go , whatever our doom , it will not take the Orwellian shape '' . With facts mainly in his mind , he was often acute in the matter of style , and he said , `` The young who have as yet nothing to say will try larks with initial letters and broken lines . But put them before a situation which they are forced to depict '' , -- he was speaking of the Spanish civil war , -- `` and they have no hesitation ; ; they merely do their best to make it real for others '' . He looked at her as she spoke , then got up as she was speaking still , and , simply and wordlessly , walked out . And that was the end . Or nearly . He went to the Hotel Mayflower and telegraphed Mencken . Would he meet him in Baltimore in Drawing Room A , Car Three on the train leaving Washington at nine o'clock next morning ? ? They would go to New York together , where parties would be piled on weariness and on misery . But not for long . Both Alfred Harcourt and Donald Brace had written him enthusiastic praise of Elmer Gantry ( any changes could be made in proof , which was already coming from the printer ) and they had ordered 140,000 copies -- the largest first printing of any book in history . But none of this could soothe the exacerbated nerves . On New Year's Eve , Alfred Harcourt drove him up the Hudson to Bill Brown's Training Camp , a well-known establishment for the speedy if temporary rehabilitation of drunkards who could no longer help themselves . But , in departing , Lewis begged Breasted that there be no liquor in the apartment at the Grosvenor on his return , and he took with him the first thirty galleys of Elmer Gantry . On January 4 , with the boys back at school and college , Mrs. Lewis wrote Harcourt to say that she was `` through , quite through '' . `` This whole Washington venture was my last gesture , and it has failed . Physically as well as mentally I have reached the limit of my endurance . My last gift to him is complete silence until the book is out and the first heated discussion dies down . For him to divorce God and wife simultaneously would be bad publicity . I am really ill at the present moment , and I will go to some sort of a sanitarium to normalize myself '' . And she withdrew then to Cromwell Hall , in Cromwell , Connecticut . Harcourt replied : `` I do really hope you can achieve serenity in the course of time . Of course I hope Hal can also , but those hopes are much more faint '' . 8 on January 8 , 1927 , he returned to the Grosvenor in high spirits , and looking fit . He had been , he wrote Mencken at once , `` in the country '' , a euphemism for an experience that had not greatly changed him . Charles Breasted remembers that , before unpacking his bag , he telephoned his bootlegger with a generous order , and almost at once `` the familiar procession of people began milling through our living room at any hour between two P.M. and three A.M. '' . They were strays of every kind -- university students and journalists , Village hangers-on and barflies , taxi drivers and editors and unknown poets , as well as friends like Elinor Wylie and William Rose Benet , the Van Dorens and Nathan , Rebecca West and Hugh Walpole and Osbert Sitwell , Laurence Stallings , Lewis Browne , William Seabrook , Arthur Hopkins , the Woodwards . When he came home from his office at the end of the afternoon , Breasted never knew what gathering he should expect to find , but there almost always was one . He did not neglect his wife in Cromwell Hall , but telephoned her and wrote her with assurances of his continuing interest and of his wish to `` stand behind '' her in their separation and of his hope that there would be no bitterness between them . She was occupying herself in an attempt to write an article about the variety of houses that they had rented abroad . He was of unsettled mind as to whether he should go abroad when the Gantry galleys were finished . For a time , urging Breasted to give up his public relations work and take up writing instead , he hoped to persuade him to become his assistant in research for the labor novel ; ; if Breasted agreed , they would get a car and tour the country , visiting every kind of industrial center . When Breasted insisted that this was impossible for him , Lewis decided to go abroad . He telephoned L. M. Birkhead and asked him and his wife to come to Europe as his guests , but Birkhead declined on the grounds that one of them must be in the United States when Elmer Gantry was published . Lewis was spending his mornings , with the help of two secretaries , on the galleys of that long novel , making considerable revisions , and the combination of hard work and hard frivolity exhausted him once more , so that he was compelled to spend three days in the Harbor Sanatorium in the last week of January . Before he made that retreat , he telephoned Earl Blackman in Kansas City and asked him to come to Europe with him . Blackman was to be in New York by February 2 , because they were sailing at 12:01 next morning . Lewis told him what clothes he should bring along , and enjoined him not to buy anything that he did not already own , they would do that in New York . Blackman arrived a day or two early , and Lewis took him to a department store immediately and outfitted him , luggage and all , and then he took him to a party at the Woodwards that went on until four in the morning . On the evening that they were to sail , Lewis himself gave a party , but he was too indisposed to appear at it . Woodward took occasion to warn Blackman about Lewis's drinking and urged him to `` try to keep him sober '' . After a dinner party for which she had come down to New York , Mrs. Lewis and Casanova arrived to see them off , and Elinor Wylie made tart observations that indicated that Lewis had been less discreet than he had promised to be about the real nature of their separation . Nevertheless , Mrs. Lewis was still solicitous of his condition : let him do as he wished , let him sleep with chambermaids if he must , but , she begged Blackman , try to keep him from drinking a great deal and bring him back in good health . As they stood at the first-class rail , waving down to his wife and Casanova below , Lewis said , `` Earl , there is Gracie's future husband '' . And when questioned by ship's reporters about the separation , she said , `` I adore him , and he adores me '' . Blackman had brought news from Kansas City . Before his departure , a group of his friends , the Reverend Stidger among them , had given him a luncheon , and Stidger had seen advance sheets of Elmer Gantry . He was outraged by the book and announced that he had discovered fifty technical errors in its account of church practices . L. M. Birkhead challenged him to name one and he was silent . But his rancor did not cease , and presently , on March 13 , when he preached a sermon on the text , `` And Ben-hadad Was Drunk '' , he told his congregation how disappointed he was in Mr. Lewis , how he regretted having had him in his house , and how he should have been warned by the fact that the novelist was drunk all the time that he was working on the book . But that sermon , like those of hundreds of other ministers , was yet to be delivered . In London Lewis took the usual suite in Bury Street . To the newspapers he talked about his unquiet life , about his wish to be a newspaperman once more , about the prevalence of American slang in British speech , about the loquacity of the English and the impossibility of finding quiet in a railway carriage , about his plans to wander for two years `` unless stopped and made to write another book '' . The Manchester Guardian wondered how anyone in a railway carriage would have an opportunity to talk to Mr. Lewis , since it was well known that Mr. Lewis always did all of the talking . His English friends , it said , had gone into training to keep up with him vocally and with his `` allegro movements around the luncheon table '' . The New York Times editorialist wondered just who would stop Mr. Lewis and make him write a book . Lewis's remarks about his marriage were suggestive enough to induce American reporters to invade the offices of Harcourt , Brace & Company for information , to pursue Mrs. Lewis to Cromwell Hall , and , after she had returned to New York , to ferret her out at the Stanhope on upper Fifth Avenue where she had taken an apartment . There , to the Evening Post , she emphatically denied the divorce rumors and explained that she had stayed behind because of the schooling of their son , which henceforth would be strictly American . These rumors of permanent separation started up a whole crop of stories about her . One had it that a friend , protesting her snobbery , said , `` But , Gracie , you are an American , aren't you '' ? ? And she replied , `` I was born in America , but I was conceived in Vienna '' . Lewis himself furthered these tales . He is said to have reported that once , when she went to a hospital to call on a friend after a serious operation , and the friend protested that it had been `` nothing '' , she replied , `` Well , it was your healthy American peasant blood that pulled you through '' . With these and similar tales he was entertaining his English friends , all of whom he was seeing when he was not showing Blackman the sights of London and its environs . At once upon his arrival , he telephoned Lady Sybil Colefax who invited them to tea , and then Lewis decided to give a party as a quick way of rounding up his friends . He invited Lady Sybil , Lord Thomson , Bechhofer Roberts , and a half dozen others . It was a dinner party , Lewis had been drinking during the afternoon , and long before the party really got under way , he was quite drunk , with the result that the party broke up even before dinner was over . Lewis , at the head of the table , would leap up and move around behind the chairs of his guests making remarks that , when not highly offensive , were at least highly inappropriate , and then presently he collapsed and was put to bed . When Blackman emerged from the bedroom , everyone was gone except the tolerant Lord Thomson , who stayed and chatted with him for half an hour , and then Blackman lay awake most of that night , despairing of what he must expect on the Continent . Finally , at dawn , he fell asleep , and when he awoke and came into the living room , he found Lewis in his pajamas before the fire , smoking a cigarette . Blackman said that he wanted to apologize for not having prevented Lewis from making that horrible spectacle of himself , that he should have seized him by the neck at once and forcibly hauled him into his bedroom . Lewis warned him never to lay a hand on him , and then Blackman asked for his fare back to the United States . Lewis looked at him and began to cry , and then , saying that he was going to make a promise , he asked Blackman to call the porter and to tell him to take out all the liquor that he did not want . `` And from now on , for the rest of this trip , I will only drink what you agree that I should drink '' . Blackman called the porter and had him remove everything but one bottle of brandy , and after that they would have a cocktail or two before dinner , or , on one of their walking trips , beer , or , in France and Italy , wine in moderation . Lewis gave him a guidebook tour of London and , motoring and walking , took him to Stratford , but the London stay was for only ten days , and on the twentieth they took the train for Southampton , where they spent the night for an early morning Channel crossing . Near Southampton , in a considerable establishment , lived Homer Vachell , a well-known pulp writer , and his brother , Horace -- both friends of Lewis's . He suggested that they call on these brothers , who received them pleasantly . Then they returned to their hotel and got ready for bed . It was late , and Blackman was ready to go to sleep , but Lewis was not . He said , `` We had a good time tonight , didn't we , Earl '' ? ? Earl agreed , and Lewis said that it would have been very different if his wife had been with him . Then he kept Blackman awake for more than an hour while he did an imaginary dialogue between his wife and himself in which , discussing the evening , he was continually berated . He began the dialogue by having his wife announce that one does not invade people's homes without warning them that one is coming , and went on from that with the entire catalogue of his social gaucheries . From 1613 on , if the lists exist , they contain between twenty to thirty names . As the total number of incepting bachelors in 1629 was , according to Masson ( Life , 1:218 ) and n , two hundred fifty-nine , the twenty-four names listed in the ordo senioritatis for that year constitute slightly less than one tenth of the total number of bachelors who then incepted . There were four from St. John's and four from Christ's , three from Pembroke , and two from each of the colleges , Jesus , Peterhouse , Queens' , and Trinity , with Caius , Clare , King's , Magdalene , and Sidney supplying one each in the ordo senioritatis . The list was headed by ( Henry ) Hutton of St. John's who was matriculated from St. John's at Easter , 1625 . He became a fellow of Jesus in 1629 , proceeded M.A. from Jesus in 1632 , and was proctor in 1639-40 . The second name was ( Edward ) Kempe , matriculated from Queens' College at Easter , 1625 . He proceeded M.A. in 1632 , and B.D. in 1639 , being made fellow in 1632 . He was ordained deacon 16 June and priest 22 December 1633 . The third name was ( John ) Ravencroft , who was admitted to the Inner Temple in November 1631 . The fourth name was ( John ) Milton of Christ's College , followed by ( Richard ) Manningham of Peterhouse , who matriculated 16 October 1624 . Venn gave his B.A. as 1624 , a mistake for 1629 . Manningham also proceeded M.A. in 1632 and became a fellow of his college in that year . ( John ) Boutflower of Christ's was twelfth in the list , coming from Perse School under Mr. Lovering as pensioner 20 April 1625 under Mr. Alsop . The fourteenth name was ( Richard ) Buckenham , written Buckman , admitted to Christ's College under Scott 2 July 1625 . The fifteenth name was ( Thomas ) Baldwin , admitted to Christ's 4 March 1625 under Alsop . Christ's College was well represented that year in the ordo , and the name highest on the list from that college was Milton's , fourth in the entire university . Small wonder that Milton later boasted of how well his work had been received there , since he attained a rank in the order of commencing bachelors higher than that of any other inceptor from Christ's of that year . It is not possible to reconstruct fully the arrangements whereby these honors lists were then made up or even how the names that they contained assumed the order in which we find them . The process usually began with a tutor boasting about a boy , as Chappell had boasted about Lightfoot , to the higher officers of the college and university . Then the various officers of the college might take up the case . It would , however , reach the proctors and other officers in charge of the public-school performances of the incepting bachelors , and the place that any individual obtained in the lists depended greatly on how he comported himself in the public schools during his acts therein as he was incepting . Of course the higher officials could add or place a name on the list wherever they wished . Milton's name being fourth is neither too high nor too low to be assigned to the arbitrary action of vice-chancellor , proctor , master , or other mighty hand . He evidently earned the place assigned him . Recapitulation of Milton's undergraduate career Looking back from the spring of 1629 over the four years of Milton's undergraduate days , certain phases of his college career stand out as of permanent consequence to him and hence to us . Of course the principal factor in the whole experience was the kind of education he received . It differed from what an undergraduate receives today from any American college or university mainly in the certainty of what he was forced to learn compared with the loose and widely scattered information obtained today by most of our undergraduates . Milton was required to absorb and display an intensive and accurate knowledge of Latin grammar , logic-rhetoric , ethics , physics or natural philosophy , metaphysics , and Latin , Greek , and Hebrew . He had also sampled various special fields of learning , being unable to miss some study of divinity , Justinian ( law ) , and Galen ( medicine ) . Above all , he had learned to write formal Latin prose and verse to a remarkable degree of artistry . He had learned to dispute devastatingly , both formally and informally in Latin , and according to the rules on any topic , pro or con , drawn from almost any subject , more especially from Aristotle's works . He could produce carefully constructed orations , set and formal speeches , artfully and prayerfully made by writing and rewriting with all the aid his tutor and others could provide , and then delivered verbatim from memory . He had also learned to dispute extempore remarkably well , the main evidence for which of course is the presence of his name in the honors list of 1628/29 . He also displayed the ability to write Latin verse on almost any topic of dispute , the verses , of course , to be delivered from memory . Then we have surviving at least one instance of a poem prepared for another , in Naturam non Pati Senium , and perhaps also the De Idea Platonica . But his greatest achievement , in his own eyes and in the eyes of his colleagues and teachers , was his amazing ability to produce literary Latin pieces , and he was often called on to do so . These were his public academic activities , domi forisque , in the college and in the university . And his performances attracted much attention , as the frequency of his surviving pieces in any calendar that may be set up for his undergraduate activities testifies . His other activities are not so easily recovered . His statements about sports and exercises of a physical nature are suggestive , but inconclusive . His later boastings of his skill with the small sword are indicative of much time and practice devoted to the use of that weapon . Venn and others have dealt with sports and pastimes at Cambridge in Milton's day with not very specific results . Milton himself , uncommunicative as he is about his lesser and nonliterary activities , at least gives us some evidence that he was a great walker , under any and all conditions . His early poems and some of his prose prolusions speak of wanderings in the city and the neighboring country that may be extended to Cambridge and its surrounding countryside . The town itself and the `` reedy Cam '' he often visited , as did all in the university . The churches , the taverns , and the various other places of the town must have known his figure well as he roved to and about them . The tiny hamlet of Chesterton to the north , with the fens and marshes lying on down the Ouse River , may have attracted him often , as it did many other youths of the time . The Gog Magog Hills to the southeast afforded him and all other students a vantage point from which to view the town and university of their dwelling . The country about Cambridge is flat and not particularly spectacular in its scenery , though it offers easy going to the foot traveler . Ball games , especially football , required some attention , and other organized sports may have attracted him as participant or spectator . He smoked , as did everybody , and imbibed the various alcoholic beverages of that day , although his protestations while at Cambridge and after that he was no drunkard point to reasonable abstinence from the wild drinking bouts of some of the undergraduates and , we must add , of some of their elders including many of the regents or teachers . What manner of person does Milton appear to have been when as an undergraduate he resided at Christ's College ? ? He was then a slightly built young man of pleasing appearance , medium stature , and handsome face . Graceful as his fencing and dancing lessons had taught him to be in addition to the natural grace of his slight , wiry frame , he cut enough of a figure to have evoked a nickname in the college , to which he himself referred in Prolusion 6 : : A quibusdam , , audivi nuper Domina . That is , if we can trust that most specious of prolusions , packed as it is with wit and persiflage . The Domina sounds real enough , if we could only trust the conditions under which we learn of its use ; ; but anyone who would put much trust in any phase of Prolusion 6 , except its illusive allusiveness deserves whatever fate may be meted out to him by virtue of the egregiously stilted banter . In short , the traditional epithet for Milton of ' Lady of Christ's ' , while eminently fitting , rests only on this baffling passage in the midst of the most treacherous piece of writing Milton left us . Aubrey's mention of it ( 2:67 , and Bodleian MS Aubr. 8 , F. 63 ) comes from this prolusion , through Christopher Milton or Edward Phillips . It is not a question of truth or falsity ; ; the prolusion in which the autobiographic statement about the epithet occurs is such a mass of intentionally buried allusions that almost nothing in it can be accepted as true -- or discarded as false . The entire exercise , Latin and English , is most suggestive of the kind of person Milton had become at Christ's during his undergraduate career ; ; the mere fact that he was selected , though as a substitute , to act as interlocutor or moderator for it , or perhaps we should say with Buck as ' father of the act ' , is in itself a difficult phase of his development to grasp . Milton was to act as the archfool , the supreme wit , the lightly bantering pater , Pater Liber , who could at once trip lightly over that which deserved such treatment , or could at will annihilate the common enemies of the college gathering , and with words alone . From an exercise involving merely raucous , rough-and-tumble comedy , in his hands the performance turned into a revel of wit and word play , indecent at times , but always learned , pointed , and carefully aimed at some individuals present , and at the whole assembly . To do this successfully required great skill and a special talent for both solemn and ribald raillery , a talent not bestowed on many persons , but one with which Milton was marked as being endowed and in which , at least in this performance , he obviously reveled . It may be thought unfortunate that he was called on entirely by accident to perform , if again we may trust the opening of the oratio , for it marks the beginning for us of his use of his peculiar form of witty word play that even in this Latin banter has in it the unmistakable element of viciousness and an almost sadistic delight in verbally tormenting an adversary . But the real beginnings of this development in him go back to the opposing of grammar school , and probably if it had not been this occasion and these Latin lines it would have been some others , such as the first prolusion , that set off this streak in him of unbridled and scathing verbal attack on an enemy . All western Europe would hear and listen to him in this same vein about the middle of the century . But these prolusions that we have surviving from the Christ's College days are only one phase of his existence then . Perhaps his most important private activity was the combination of reading , discussion with a few -- if we can trust his writings to Diodati and the younger Gill , very few -- congenial companions . Lines 23-36 of Lycidas later point to a friendship with Edward King , who entered Christ's College 9 June 1626 . No other names among the young men in residence at the time seem to have been even suggested by Milton as those of persons with whom he in any way consorted . But that scarcely means that he was the aloof , forbidding type of student who shared few if any activities with his fellows , the banter of the surviving prolusions providing enough evidence to deny this . Apparently he was not a participant in the college or university theatricals , which he once attacked as utterly unworthy performances ( see Apology , 3:300 ) ; ; but even in that famous passage , Milton was aiming not at the theatricals as such but at their performance by ' persons either enter'd , or presently to enter into the ministry . The fact that he nowhere mentioned theatrical performances as part of the activities of the boys later in his hypothetical academy ( 1644 ) should not be taken too seriously as evidence that he desired them to eschew such performances . Perhaps , in that short piece or letter written to Hartlib in which he sketched his scheme for educating young men , he merely overlooked that phase of their exercises . Writers of this class of science fiction have clearly in mind the assumptions that man can master the principles of this cause-and-effect universe and that such mastery will necessarily better the human lot . On the other hand , the bright vision of the future has been directly stated in science fiction concerned with projecting ideal societies -- science fiction , of course , is related , if sometimes distantly , to that utopian literature optimistic about science , literature whose period of greatest vigor in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries produced Edward Bellamy's Looking Backward and H. G. Wells's A Modern Utopia . In Arthur Clarke's Childhood's End ( 1953 ) , though written after the present flood of dystopias began , we can see the bright vision of science fiction clearly defined . Childhood's End -- apparently indebted to Kurd Lasswitz's Utopian romance , Auf Zwei Planeten ( 1897 ) , and also to Wells's Histories Of The Future , especially , The World Set Free ( 1914 ) and The Shape Of Things To Come ( 1933 ) -- describes the bloodless conquest of earth by the Overlords , vastly superior creatures who come to our world in order to prepare the human race for its next stage of development , an eventual merging with the composite mind of the universe . Arriving just in time to stop men from turning their planet into a radioactive wasteland , the Overlords unite earth into one world in which justice , order , and benevolence prevail and ignorance , poverty , and fear have ceased to exist . Under their rule , earth becomes a technological utopia . Both abolition of war and new techniques of production , particularly robot factories , greatly increase the world's wealth , a situation described in the following passage , which has the true utopian ring : `` Everything was so cheap that the necessities of life were free , provided as a public service by the community , as roads , water , street lighting and drainage had once been . A man could travel anywhere he pleased , eat whatever he fancied -- without handing over any money '' . With destructive tensions and pressures removed men have the vigor and energy to construct a new human life -- rebuilding entire cities , expanding facilities for entertainment , providing unlimited opportunities for education -- indeed , for the first time giving everyone the chance to employ his talents to the fullest . Mankind , as a result , attains previously undreamed of levels of civilization and culture , a golden age which the Overlords , a very evident symbol of science , have helped produce by introducing reason and the scientific method into human activities . Thus science is the savior of mankind , and in this respect Childhood's End only blueprints in greater detail the vision of the future which , though not always so directly stated , has nevertheless been present in the minds of most science-fiction writers . Considering then the optimism which has permeated science fiction for so long , what is really remarkable is that during the last twelve years many science-fiction writers have turned about and attacked their own cherished vision of the future , have attacked the Childhood's End kind of faith that science and technology will inevitably better the human condition . And they have done this on a very large scale , with a veritable flood of novels and stories which are either dystopias or narratives of adventure with dystopian elements . Because of the means of publication -- science-fiction magazines and cheap paperbacks -- and because dystopian science fiction is still appearing in quantity the full range and extent of this phenomenon can hardly be known , though one fact is evident : the science-fiction imagination has been immensely fertile in its extrapolations . Among the dystopias , for example , Isaac Asimov's The Caves Of Steel ( 1954 ) portrays the deadly effects on human life of the super-city of the future ; ; James Blish's A Case Of Conscience ( 1958 ) describes a world hiding from its own weapons of destruction in underground shelters ; ; Ray Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 ( 1954 ) presents a book-burning society in which wall television and hearing-aid radios enslave men's minds ; ; Walter M. Miller , Jr.'s , A Canticle For Leibowitz ( 1959 ) finds men , after the great atomic disaster , stumbling back to their previous level of civilization and another catastrophe ; ; Frederick Pohl's `` The Midas Touch '' ( 1954 ) predicts an economy of abundance which , in order to remain prosperous , must set its robots to consuming surplus production ; ; Clifford D. Simak's `` How-2 '' ( 1954 ) tells of a future when robots have taken over , leaving men nothing to do ; ; and Robert Sheckley's The Status Civilization ( 1960 ) describes a world which , frightened by the powers of destruction science has given it , becomes static and conformist . A more complete list would also include Bradbury's `` The Pedestrian '' ( 1951 ) , Philip K. Dick's Solar Lottery ( 1955 ) , David Karp's One ( 1953 ) , Wilson Tucker's The Long Loud Silence ( 1952 ) , Jack Vance's To Live Forever ( 1956 ) , Gore Vidal's Messiah ( 1954 ) , and Bernard Wolfe's Limbo ( 1952 ) , as well as the three perhaps most outstanding dystopias , Frederik Pohl and C. M. Kornbluth's The Space Merchants ( 1953 ) , Kurt Vonnegut's Player Piano ( 1952 ) , and John Wyndham's Re-Birth ( 1953 ) , works which we will later examine in detail . The novels and stories like Pohl's Drunkard's Walk ( 1960 ) , with the focus on adventure and with the dystopian elements only a dim background -- in this case an uneasy , overpopulated world in which the mass of people do uninteresting routine jobs while a carefully selected , university-trained elite runs everything -- are in all likelihood as numerous as dystopias . There is , of course , nothing new about dystopias , for they belong to a literary tradition which , including also the closely related satiric utopias , stretches from at least as far back as the eighteenth century and Swift's Gulliver's Travels to the twentieth century and Zamiatin's We , Capek's War With The Newts , Huxley's Brave New World , E. M. Forster's `` The Machine Stops '' , C. S. Lewis's That Hideous Strength , and Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four , and which in science fiction is represented before the present deluge as early as Wells's trilogy , The Time Machine , `` A Story Of The Days To Come '' , and When The Sleeper Wakes , and as recently as Jack Williamson's `` With Folded Hands '' ( 1947 ) , the classic story of men replaced by their own robots . What makes the current phenomenon unique is that so many science-fiction writers have reversed a trend and turned to writing works critical of the impact of science and technology on human life . Since the great flood of these dystopias has appeared only in the last twelve years , it seems fairly reasonable to assume that the chief impetus was the 1949 publication of Nineteen Eighty-Four , an assumption which is supported by the frequent echoes of such details as Room 101 , along with education by conditioning from Brave New World , a book to which science-fiction writers may well have returned with new interest after reading the more powerful Orwell dystopia . Not all recent science fiction , however , is dystopian , for the optimistic strain is still very much alive in Mission Of Gravity and Childhood's End , as we have seen , as well as in many other recent popular novels and stories like Fred Hoyle's The Black Cloud ( 1957 ) ; ; and among works of dystopian science fiction , not all provide intelligent criticism and very few have much merit as literature -- but then real quality has always been scarce in science fiction . In addition , there are many areas of the human situation besides the impact of science and technology which are examined , for science-fiction dystopias often extrapolate political , social , economic tendencies only indirectly related to science and technology . Nevertheless , with all these qualifications and exceptions , the current dystopian phenomenon remains impressive for its criticism that science and technology , instead of bringing utopia , may well enslave , dehumanize , and even destroy men . How effectively these warnings can be presented is seen in Pohl and Kornbluth's The Space Merchants , Vonnegut's Player Piano and Wyndham's Re-Birth . Easily the best known of these three novels is The Space Merchants , a good example of a science-fiction dystopia which extrapolates much more than the impact of science on human life , though its most important warning is in this area , namely as to the use to which discoveries in the behavioral sciences may be put . The novel , which is not merely dystopian but also brilliantly satiric , describes a future America where one-sixteenth of the population , the men who run advertising agencies and big corporations , control the rest of the people , the submerged fifteen-sixteenths who are the workers and consumers , with the government being no more than `` a clearing house for pressures '' . Like ours , the economy of the space merchants must constantly expand in order to survive , and , like ours , it is based on the principle of `` ever increasing everybody's work and profits in the circle of consumption '' . The consequences , of course , have been dreadful : reckless expansion has led to overpopulation , pollution of the earth and depletion of its natural resources . For example , even the most successful executive lives in a two-room apartment while ordinary people rent space in the stairwells of office buildings in which to sleep at night ; ; soyaburgers have replaced meat , and wood has become so precious that it is saved for expensive jewelry ; ; and the atmosphere is so befouled that no one dares walk in the open without respirators or soot plugs . While The Space Merchants indicates , as Kingsley Amis has correctly observed , some of the `` impending consequences of the growth of industrial and commercial power '' and satirizes `` existing habits in the advertising profession '' , its warning and analysis penetrate much deeper . What is wrong with advertising is not only that it is an `` outrage , an assault on people's mental privacy '' or that it is a major cause for a wasteful economy of abundance or that it contains a coercive tendency ( which is closer to the point ) . Rather what Kornbluth and Pohl are really doing is warning against the dangers inherent in perfecting `` a science of man and his motives '' . The Space Merchants , like such humanist documents as Joseph Wood Krutch's The Measure Of Man and C. S. Lewis's The Abolition Of Man , considers what may result from the scientific study of human nature . If man is actually the product of his environment and if science can discover the laws of human nature and the ways in which environment determines what people do , then someone -- a someone probably standing outside traditional systems of values -- can turn around and develop completely efficient means for controlling people . Thus we will have a society consisting of the planners or conditioners , and the controlled . And this , of course , is exactly what Madison Avenue has been accused of doing albeit in a primitive way , with its `` hidden persuaders '' and what the space merchants accomplish with much greater sophistication and precision . Pohl and Kornbluth's ad men have long since thrown out appeals to reason and developed techniques of advertising which tie in with `` every basic trauma and neurosis in American life '' , which work on the libido of consumers , which are linked to the `` great prime motivations of the human spirit '' . As the hero , Mitchell Courtenay , explains before his conversion , the job of advertising is `` to convince people without letting them know that they're being convinced '' . And to do this requires first of all the kind of information about people which is provided by the scientists in industrial anthropology and consumer research , who , for example , tell Courtenay that three days is the `` optimum priming period for a closed social circuit to be triggered with a catalytic cue-phrase '' -- which means that an effective propaganda technique is to send an idea into circulation and then three days later reinforce or undermine it . And the second requirement for convincing people without their knowledge is artistic talent to prepare the words and pictures which persuade by using the principles which the scientists have discovered . Thus the copywriter in the world of the space merchants is the person who in earlier ages might have been a lyric poet , the person `` capable of putting together words that stir and move and sing '' . As Courtenay explains , `` Here in this profession we reach into the souls of men and women . And we do it by taking talent -- and redirecting it '' . Now the basic question to be asked in this situation is what motivates the manipulators , that is , what are their values ? ? -- since , as Courtenay says , `` Nobody should play with lives the way we do unless he's motivated by the highest ideals '' . But the only ideal he can think of is `` Sales '' ! ! Indeed , again and again , the space merchants confirm the prediction of the humanists that the conditioners and behavioral scientists , once they have seen through human nature , will have nothing except their impulses and desires to guide them . We often say of a person that he `` looks young for his age '' or `` old for his age '' . Yet even in the more extreme of such cases we seldom go very far astray in guessing what his age actually is . And this means , I suppose , that almost invariably age reveals itself by easily recognizable signs engraved on both the body and the mind . `` Young for his age '' means only the presence of some minor characteristic not quite usual . Stigmata quite sufficient for diagnosis are nevertheless there . An assumption of youth , or the presence of a few youthful characteristics , deceives no more successfully than rouge or dyed hair . `` Looking young for your age '' means `` for your age '' and it means no more . A mind expressing itself in words may reveal itself a little less obviously as old or young . Its surface loses its bloom and submits to its wrinkles in ways less immediately obvious than the body does . Youth may be , and often is , skeptical , cynical or despairing ; ; age may be idealistic , believing and much given to professions of optimism . But there is , nevertheless , always a subtle difference in the way in which supposedly similar opinions are held . The pessimism of the young is defiant , anxious to confess or even exaggerate its ostensible gloom , and so exuberant as to reveal the fact that it regards its ability to face up to the awful truth as more than enough to compensate for the awfulness of that truth . Similarly the optimism of age protests too much . If it proclaims that the best is yet to be , it always arouses , at least in the young , either a suspicious question or perhaps the exclamation of the Negro youth who saw on a tombstone the inscription , `` I am not dead but sleeping '' . `` Boy , you ain't fooling nobody but yourself '' . We may say of some unfortunates that they were never young . We cannot truthfully say of anyone who has succeeded in entering deep into his sixties that he was never old . Those famous lines of the Greek Anthology with which a fading beauty dedicates her mirror at the shrine of a goddess reveal a wise attitude : `` Venus , take my votive glass , Since I am not what I was , What from this day I shall be , Venus , let me never see '' . No good can come of contemplating the sad , inevitable fact that once youth has passed `` a worse and worse time still succeeds the former '' . But there are at least two reasons for contemplating one's mind in even a cracked mirror . One is that there sometimes are real although inadequate compensations in growing old . Serenity , if one is fortunate enough to achieve it , is not so good as joy , but it is something . Even to be `` from hope and fear set free '' is at least better than to have lost the first without having got rid of the second . The other reason ( and the one with which I am here concerned ) is that one thus becomes inclined to inquire of any opinion , or change of opinion , whether it represents the wisdom of experience or is only the result of the difference between youth and age which is as inevitable as the all too obvious physical differences . One may be exasperatingly aware that if the answer is favorable it will be judged such only by those of one's own age . But at least the question has been raised . Many readers of this department no doubt discount certain of my opinions for the simple reason that they can guess pretty accurately , even if they have never actually been told , what my age is . At least I should like them to know that I know these discounts are being made . Let me then ( and in public ) glance into the mirror . I have known some men and women who said that the selves they are told about or even remember seem utter strangers to them now ; ; that their remote past is as discontinuous with their present selves , as lacking in any conscious likeness to their mature personality , as the self of a butterfly may be imagined discontinuous with that of the caterpillar it once was . For my part I find it difficult to conceive such a state of affairs . I have changed and I have reversed opinions ; ; but I am so aware of an uninterrupted continuity of the persona or ego that I see only as absurd the tendency of some psychologists from Heraclitus to Pirandello and Proust to regard consciousness as no more than a flux amid which nothing remains unchanged . So far as I am concerned , the child is unmistakably father to the man , despite the obvious fact that child and father differ greatly -- sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse . Fundamental values , temperament and the way in which one approaches a conviction change less , of course , than specific opinions . That fact is very clearly illustrated in the case of the many present-day intellectuals who were Communists or near-Communists in their youth and are now so extremely conservative ( or reactionary , as many would say ) that they can define no important political conviction that does not seem so far from even a centrist position as to make the distinction between Mr. Nixon and Mr. Khrushchev for them hardly worth noting . But in ways more fundamental than specific political opinions they are still what they always were : passionate , sure without a shadow of doubt of whatever it is that they are sure of , capable of seeing black and white only and , therefore , committed to the logical extreme of whatever it is they are temporarily committed to . To those of my readers who find many of my opinions morally , or politically , or sociologically antiquated ( and I have reason to know that there are some such ) , I would like to say what I have already hinted , namely , that some of my opinions may indeed be subject to some discount on the simple ground that I am no longer young and therefore incapable of being youthful of mind . But I will also remind them that I have always been inclined to skepticism , to a kind of Laodicean lack of commitment so far as public affairs are concerned ; ; so that , although not as eager as I once was to be disapproved of , I can still resist prevailing opinions . At about the age of twelve I became a Spencerian liberal , and I have always considered myself a liberal of some kind even though the definition has changed repeatedly since Spencer became a reactionary . Several times in my youth I voted the Socialist ticket , but less because I was Socialist than because I was not either a Republican or a Democrat , and I voted for Franklin Roosevelt every time he was a candidate . Yet during the years when I was on the staff of The Nation , I tried to the limit the patience of the editors on almost every occasion when I was permitted to write an editorial having a bearing on a political or social question . Never once during the trying thirties did I come so close to succumbing to the private climate of opinion as to grant Russian communism even that most weasel-worded of encomiums `` an interesting experiment '' . There are few things of which I am prouder than of that unblemished record . Many of my friends at the time thought that I had received a well-deserved condemnation when Lincoln Steffens denounced me in a review of one of my books as a perfect example of the obsolete man who could understand and sympathize only with the dead past . But he , as I can now retort , was the man who could see so short a distance ahead that after a visit to Russia he gave voice to the famous exclamation : `` I have seen the future and it works '' . The favorite excuse of those who have now recanted their approval of communism is that they did not know how things would develop . With this excuse I have never been much impressed . There was , it seems to me , enough in the openly declared principles and intentions of Russian leaders to alienate honorable men without their having to wait to see how it would turn out . Once many years ago I sat at dinner next to Arthur Train , and the subject of The Nation came up . He asked me suddenly , `` What are your political opinions '' ? ? `` Well '' , I replied , `` some of my colleagues on the paper regard me as a rank reactionary '' . After a moment's thought he replied , `` That still leaves you a lot of latitude '' . And I suppose it did . I never have been , and am not now , any kind of utopian . When I first came across Samuel Johnson's pronouncement , `` the remedy for the ills of life is palliative rather than radical '' , it seemed to me to sum up the profoundest of political and social truths . It will probably explain more of my attitudes toward society than any other phrase or principle could . Why did I choose to fill these pages in this particular issue with this mixture of rather tenuous reflections and autobiography ? ? The reason is , I think , my awareness that my remarks last quarter on pacifism may well have served to confirm the opinion of some that my tendency to skepticism and dissent gets us nowhere , and that I am simply too old to hope . I would , however , like to suggest that , wrong though I may be , the tendency to see dilemmas rather than solutions is one of which I have been a victim ever since I can remember , and therefore not merely a senile phenomenon . I know that one must act . But one need not always be sure that the action is either wise or conclusive . Apropos of what some would call cynicism , I remember an anecdote the source of which I forget . It concerns a small-town minister who staged an impressive object lesson by confining a lion and a lamb together in the same cage outside his church door . Not only his parishioners , but the whole town and , ultimately , the whole county were enormously impressed by this object lesson . One day he was visited by a delegation of would-be imitators who wanted to know his secret . `` How on earth do you manage it ? ? What is the trick '' ? ? `` Why '' , he replied , `` it is perfectly simple ; ; there is no trick involved . All you have to do is put in a fresh lamb from time to time '' . Cynical ? ? Blasphemous ? ? Not really , it seems to me . The promise that the lion and the lamb will lie down together was given in the future tense . It is not something that can be expected to happen now . Without really changing the general subject , I take this opportunity to confess that I am troubled by doubts , not only about pacifism , but also when asked to join in the protest against a law that most of those who consider themselves humane and liberal seem to regard as obviously barbarous ; ; namely , the law that prescribes the death penalty for murder when there seem to be no extenuating circumstances . It is not that I am unaware of the force of their strongest contention . Life , they say , should be regarded as sacred and , therefore , as something that neither an individual nor his society has a right to take away . In fact I cannot imagine myself condemning a man to the noose or the electric chair if I had to take , as an individual , the responsibility for his death . Just as I know I would make a bad soldier even though I cannot sincerely call myself a pacifist , so too I would not be either a hangman by profession or , if I could avoid it , even a member of a hanging jury . Despite these facts the question `` : : Should no murderer ever be executed '' ? ? Seems to me to create a dilemma not to be satisfactorily disposed of by a simple negative answer . Punishment of the wrongdoer , so liberals are inclined to say , can have only three possible justifications : revenge , reformation or deterrent example . For here if anywhere in contemporary literature is a major effort to counterbalance Existentialism and restore some of its former lustre to the tarnished image of the species Man , or , as Malraux himself puts it , `` to make men conscious of the grandeur they ignore in themselves '' . 1 , Andre Malraux's The Walnut Trees Of Altenburg was written in the early years of the second World War , during a period of enforced leisure when he was taken prisoner by the Germans after the fall of France . The manuscript , presumably after being smuggled out of the country , was published in Switzerland in 1943 . The work as it stands is not the entire book that Malraux wrote at that time -- it is only the first section of a three-part novel called La Lutte avec l'Ange ; ; and this first section was somehow preserved ( there are always these annoying little mysteries about the actual facts of Malraux's life ) when the Gestapo destroyed the rest . If we are to believe the list of titles printed in Malraux's latest book , La Metamorphose Des Dieux , Vol. 1 ( ( 1957 ) , he is still engaged in writing a large novel under his original title . But as he remarks in his preface to The Walnut Trees , `` a novel can hardly ever be rewritten '' , and `` when this one appears in its final form , the form of the first part will no doubt be radically changed '' . Malraux pretends , perhaps with a trifle too self-conscious a modesty , that his fragmentary work will accordingly `` appeal only to the curiosity of bibliophiles '' and `` to connoisseurs of what might have been '' . Even in its present form , however , the first part of Malraux's unrecoverable novel is among the greatest works of mid-twentieth century literature ; ; and it should be far better known than it is . The theme of The Walnut Trees Of Altenburg is most closely related to its immediate predecessor in Malraux's array of novels : Man's Hope ( 1937 ) . This magnificent but greatly underestimated book , which bodies forth the very form and pressure of its time as no other comparable creation , has suffered severely from having been written about an historical event -- the Spanish Civil War -- that is still capable of fanning the smoldering fires of old political feuds . Even so apparently impartial a critic as W. H. Frohock has taken for granted that the book was originally intended as a piece of Loyalist propaganda ; ; and has then gone on to argue , with unimpeachable consistency , that all the obviously non-propagandistic aspects of the book are simply inadvertent `` contradictions '' . Nothing , however , could be farther from the truth . The whole purpose of Man's Hope is to portray the tragic dialectic between means and ends inherent in all organized political violence -- and even when such violence is a necessary and legitimate self-defense of liberty , justice and human dignity . Nowhere before in Malraux's pages have we met such impassioned defenders of a `` quality of man '' which transcends the realm of politics and even the realm of action altogether -- both the action of Malraux's early anarchist-adventurers like Perken and Garine , and the self-sacrificing action of dedicated Communists like Kyo Gisors and Katow in Man's Fate . `` Man engages only a small part of himself in an action '' says old Alvear the art-historian ; ; `` and the more the action claims to be total , the smaller is the part of man engaged '' . These lines never cease to haunt the book amidst all the exaltations of combat , and to make an appeal for a larger and more elemental human community than one based on the brutal necessities of war . It is this larger theme of the `` quality of man '' , a quality that transcends the ideological and flows into `` the human '' , which now forms the pulsating heart of Malraux's artistic universe . Malraux , to be sure , does not abandon the world of violence , combat and sudden death which has become his hallmark as a creative artist , and which is the only world , apparently , in which his imagination can flame into life . The Walnut Trees Of Altenburg includes not one war but two , and throws in a Turkish revolution along with some guerrilla fighting in the desert for good measure . But while war still serves as a catalyst for the values that Malraux wishes to express , these values are no longer linked with the triumph or defeat of any cause -- whether that of an individual assertion of the will-to-power , or a collective attempt to escape from the humiliation of oppression -- as their necessary condition . On the contrary , the frenzy and furor of combat is only the sombre foil against which the sudden illuminations of the human flash forth with the piercing radiance of a Caravaggio . 2 , The Walnut Trees Of Altenburg is composed in the form of a triptych , with the two small side panels framing and enclosing the main central episode of the novel . This central episode consists of a series of staccato scenes set in the period from the beginning of the present century up to the first World War . The framing scenes , on the other hand , both take place in the late Spring of 1940 , just at the moment of the defeat of France in the second great world conflict . The narrator is an Alsatian serving with the French Army , and he has the same name ( Berger ) that Malraux himself was later to use in the Resistance ; ; like Malraux he was also serving in the tank corps before being captured , and we learn as well that in civilian life he had been a writer . These biographical analogies are obvious , and far too much time has been spent speculating on their possible implications . Much more important is to grasp the feelings of the narrator ( whose full name is never given ) as he becomes aware of the disorganized and bewildered mass of French prisoners clustered together in a temporary prison camp in and around the cathedral of Chartres . For as his companions gradually dissolve back into a state of primitive confrontation with elemental necessity , as they lose all the appanage of their acquired culture , he is overcome by the feeling that he is at last being confronted with the essence of mankind . `` As a writer , by what have I been obsessed these last ten years , if not by mankind ? ? Here I am face to face with the primeval stuff '' . The intuition about mankind conveyed in these opening pages is of crucial importance for understanding the remainder of the text ; ; and we must attend to it more closely than has usually been done . What does the narrator see and what does he feel ? ? A good many pages of the first section are taken up with an account of the dogged determination of the prisoners to write to their wives and families -- even when it becomes clear that the Germans are simply allowing the letters to blow away in the wind . Awkwardly and laboriously , in stiff , unemotional phrases , the soldiers continue to bridge the distance between themselves and those they love ; ; they instinctively struggle to keep open a road to the future in their hearts . And by a skillful and unobtrusive use of imagery ( the enclosure is called a `` Roman-camp stockade '' , the hastily erected lean-to is a `` Babylonian hovel '' , the men begin to look like `` Peruvian mummies '' and to acquire `` Gothic faces '' ) , Malraux projects a fresco of human endurance -- which is also the endurance of the human -- stretching backward into the dark abyss of time . The narrator feels himself catching a glimpse of pre-history , learning of man's `` age-old familiarity with misfortune '' , as well as his `` equally age-old ingenuity , his secret faith in endurance , however crammed with catastrophes , the same faith perhaps as the cave-men used to have in the face of famine '' . This new vision of man that the narrator acquires is also accompanied by a re-vision of his previous view . `` I thought I knew more than my education had taught me , '' notes the narrator , `` because I had encountered the militant mobs of a political or religious faith '' . Is this not Malraux himself alluding to his own earlier infatuation with the ideological ? ? But now he knows `` that an intellectual is not only a man to whom books are necessary , he is any man whose reasoning , however elementary it may be , affects and directs his life '' . From this point of view the `` militant mobs '' of the past , stirred into action by one ideology or another , were all composed of `` intellectuals '' -- and this is not the level on which the essence of mankind can be discovered . The men around him , observes the narrator , `` have been living from day to day for thousands of years '' . The human is deeper than a mass ideology , certainly deeper than the isolated individual ; ; and the narrator recalls the words of his father , Vincent Berger : `` It is not by any amount of scratching at the individual that one finally comes down to mankind '' . The entire middle section of The Walnut Trees is taken up with the life of Vincent Berger himself , whose fragmentary notes on his `` encounters with mankind '' are now conveyed by his son . `` He was not much older than myself , '' writes the narrator , `` when he began to feel the impact of that human mystery which now obsesses me , and which makes me begin , perhaps , to understand him '' . For the figure of Vincent Berger Malraux has obviously drawn on his studies of T. E. Lawrence ( though Berger fights on the side of the Turks instead of against them ) , and like both Lawrence and Malraux himself he is a fervent admirer of Nietzsche . A professor at the University of Constantinople , where his first course of lectures was on Nietzsche and the `` philosophy of action '' , Vincent Berger becomes head of the propaganda department of the German Embassy in Turkey . As an Alsatian before the first World War he was of course of German nationality ; ; but he quickly involves himself in the Young Turk revolutionary movement to such an extent that his own country begins to doubt his patriotism . And , after becoming the right-hand man of Enver Pasha , he is sent by the latter to pave the way for a new Turkish Empire embracing `` the union of all Turks throughout Central Asia from Adrianople to the Chinese oases on the Silk Trade Route '' . Vincent Berger's mission is a failure because the Ottoman nationalism on which Enver Pasha counted does not exist . Central Asia is sunk in a somnolence from which nothing can awaken it ; ; and amid a dusty desolation in which nothing human any longer seemed to survive , Vincent Berger begins to dream of the Occident . `` Oh , for the green of Europe ! ! Trains whistling in the night , the rattle and clatter of cabs . '' Finally , after almost being beaten to death by a madman -- he could not fight back because madmen are sacred to Islam -- he throws up his mission and returns to Europe . This has been his first encounter with mankind , and , although he has now become a legendary figure in the popular European press , it leaves him profoundly dissatisfied . Despite Berger's report , Enver Pasha refuses to surrender his dream of a Turkish Blood Alliance ; ; and Vincent Berger learns that political ambition is more apt to hide than to reveal the truth about men . But as he discovers shortly , on returning among intellectuals obsessed by le culte du moi , his experience of action had also taught him a more positive lesson . `` For six years my father had had to do too much commanding and convincing , '' writes the narrator , `` not to understand that man begins with ' the other ' '' . And when Vincent Berger returns to Europe , this first result of his encounters with mankind is considerably enriched and deepened by a crucial revelation . For a dawning sense of illumination occurs in consequence of two events which , as so often in Malraux , suddenly confront a character with the existential question of the nature and value of human life . One such event is the landing in Europe itself , when the mingled familiarity and strangeness of the Occident , after the blank immensities of Asia , shocks the returning traveller into a realization of the infinite possibilities of human life . In a pessimistic assessment of the cold war , Eden declared : `` There must be much closer unity within the West before there can be effective negotiation with the East '' . Ordinary methods of diplomacy within the free world are inadequate , said the former Prime Minister . `` Something much more thorough is required '' . Citing the experience of the Combined Chiefs of Staff in World War 2 , , Eden said that all would have been confusion and disarray without them . `` This '' , he said , `` is exactly what has been happening between the politically free nations in the postwar world . We need joint chiefs of a political general staff '' . Citing the advances of Communist power in recent years , Sir Anthony observed : `` This very grave state of affairs will continue until the free nations accept together the reality of the danger that confronts them and unite their policies and resources to meet it '' . While I fully agree with Sir Anthony's contention , I think that we must carry the analysis farther , bearing in mind that while common peril may be the measure of our need , the existence or absence of a positive sense of community must be the measure of our capacity . While it is hazardous to project the trend of history , it seems clear that a genuine community is painfully emerging in the Western world , particularly among the countries of Western Europe . At the end of World War 2 , , free Europe was ready for a new beginning . The excesses of nationalism had brought down upon Europe a generation of tyranny and war , and a return to the old order of things seemed unthinkable . Under these conditions a new generation of Europeans began to discover the bonds of long association and shared values that for so long had been subordinated to nationalist xenophobia . A slow and painful trend toward unification has taken hold , a trend which may at any time be arrested and reversed but which may also lead to a binding federation of Europe . It may well be that the unification of Europe will prove inadequate , that the survival of free society will require nothing less than the confederation of the entire Western world . The movement toward European unity has been expressed in two currents : federalism and functionalism , one looking to the constitution of a United States of Europe , the other building on wartime precedents of practical cooperation for the solution of specific problems . Thus far the advances made have been almost entirely along functional lines . Many factors contributed to the growth of the European movement . In 1946 Sir Winston Churchill , who had spoken often of European union during the war , advocated the formation of `` a kind of United States of Europe '' . Had Churchill been returned to office in 1945 , it is just possible that Britain , instead of standing fearfully aloof , would have led Europe toward union . In 1947 and 1948 the necessity of massive coordinated efforts to achieve economic recovery led to the formation of the Organization for European Economic Cooperation to supervise and coordinate the uses of American aid under the Marshall Plan . The United States might well have exploited the opportunity provided by the European Recovery Program to push the hesitant European nations toward political federation as well as economic cooperation , but all proposals to this effect were rejected by the United States Government at the time . Another powerful factor in the European movement was the threat of Soviet aggression . The Communist coup in Czechoslovakia in 1948 was followed immediately by the conclusion of the Brussels Treaty , a 50-year alliance among Britain , France and the Benelux countries . And of course the Soviet threat was responsible for NATO , the grand alliance of the Atlantic nations . New organs of unification proliferated in the decade following the conclusion of the NATO alliance . In 1949 the Council of Europe came into existence , a purely consultative parliamentary body but the first organ of political rather than functional unity . In 1952 , the European Coal and Steel Community was launched , placing the coal and steel production of France , West Germany , Italy and Benelux under a supranational High Authority . For a time it appeared that a common European army might be created , but the project for a European Defense Community was rejected by the French National Assembly in 1954 . In 1957 the social-economic approach to European integration was capped by the formation among `` the Six '' of a tariff-free European Common Market , and Euratom for cooperation in the development of atomic energy . The `` overseas '' democracies have generally encouraged the European unification movement without seriously considering the wisdom of their own full participation in a broader Atlantic community . The United States and Canada belong only to NATO and the new O.E.C.D. . Britain until recently went along in some areas with all of the enthusiasm of the groom at a shotgun wedding . In other areas it held back , pleading its Commonwealth bonds . Now Britain has decided to seek admission to the European Economic Community and it seems certain that she will be joined by some of her partners in the loose Free Trade Area of the `` Outer Seven '' . Besides its historical significance as a break with the centuries-old tradition of British insularity , Britain's move , if successful , will constitute an historic landmark of the first importance in the movement toward the unification of Europe and the Western world . If a broader Atlantic community is to be formed -- and my own judgment is that it lies within the realm of both our needs and our capacity -- a ready nucleus of machinery is at hand in the NATO alliance . The time is now ripe , indeed overdue , for the vigorous development of its non-military potentialities , for its development as an instrument of Atlantic community . What is required is the full implementation of Article 2 of the Treaty , which provides : `` The Parties will contribute toward the further development of peaceful and friendly international relations by strengthening their free institutions , by bringing about a better understanding of the principles upon which these institutions are founded , and by promoting conditions of stability and well-being . They will seek to eliminate conflict in their international economic policies and will encourage economic collaboration between any and all of them '' . As Lester Pearson wrote in 1955 : : `` NATO cannot live on fear alone . It cannot become the source of a real Atlantic community if it remains organized to deal only with the military threat which first brought it into being '' . The problem of NATO is not one of machinery , of which there is an abundance , but of the will to use it . The NATO Council is available as an executive agency , the Standing Group as a high military authority . The unofficial Conference of Parliamentarians is available as a potential legislative authority . This machinery will not become the instrument of an Atlantic community by fiat , but only when that community evolves from potentiality to reality . The existence of a community is a state of mind -- a conviction that goals and values are widely shared , that effective communication is possible , that mutual trust is reasonably assured . An equally promising avenue toward Atlantic community may lie through the development and expansion of the O.E.C.D. . Conceived as an organ of economic cooperation , there is no reason why O.E.C.D. cannot evolve into a broader instrument of union if its members so desire . Indeed it might be a more appropriate vehicle than NATO for the development of a parliamentary organ of the Atlantic nations , because it could encompass all of the members of the Atlantic community including those , like Sweden and Switzerland , who are unwilling to be associated with an essentially military alliance like Aj . Underlying these hopes and prescriptions is a conviction that the nations of the North Atlantic area do indeed form a community , at least a potential community . There is nothing new in this ; ; what is new and compelling is that the West is now but one of several powerful civilizations , or `` systems '' , and that one or more of the others may pose a mortal danger to the West . For centuries the North Atlantic nations dominated the world and as long as they did they could afford the luxury of fighting each other . That time is now past and the Atlantic nations , if they are to survive , must develop a full-fledged community , and they must also look beyond the frontiers of `` Western civilization '' toward a world-wide `` concert of free nations '' . 6 , The burden of these reflections is that a broader unity among the free nations is at the core of our needs . And if we do not aspire to too much , it is also within our capacity . A realistic balancing of the need for new forms of international organization on the one hand , and our capacity to achieve them on the other , must be approached through the concept of `` community '' . History has demonstrated many times that concerts of nations based solely on the negative spur of common danger are unlikely to survive when the external danger ceases to be dramatically urgent . Only when a concert of nations rests on the positive foundations of shared goals and values is it likely to form a viable instrument of long-range policy . It follows that the solution to the current disunity of the free nations is only to a very limited extent a matter of devising new machinery of consultation and coordination . It is very much a matter of building the foundations of community . It is for these reasons that proposals for a `` new world order '' , through radical overhaul of the United Nations or through some sort of world federation , are utterly fatuous . In a recent book called `` World Peace Through World Law '' , two distinguished lawyers , Grenville Clark and Louis Sohn , call for just such an overhaul of the U.N. , basing their case on the world-wide fear of a nuclear holocaust . I believe that these proposals , however meritorious in terms of world needs , go far beyond our capacity to realize them . Such proposals look to an apocalyptic act , a kind of Lockian `` social contract '' on a world-wide scale . The defect of these proposals is in their attempt to outrun history and their assumption that because something may be desirable it is also possible . A working concept of the organic evolution of community must lead us in a different direction . The failures of the U.N. and of other international organs suggest that we have already gone beyond what was internationally feasible . Our problem , therefore , is to devise processes more modest in their aspirations , adjusted to the real world of sovereign nation states and diverse and hostile communities . The history of the U.N. demonstrates that in a pluralistic world we must develop processes of influence and persuasion rather than coercion . It is possible that international organization will ultimately supplant the multi-state system , but its proper function for the immediate future is to reform and supplement that system in order to render pluralism more compatible with an interdependent world . New machinery of coordination should not be our primary objective in the foreseeable future -- though perhaps the `` political general staff '' of Western leaders proposed by Sir Anthony Eden would serve a useful purpose . Generally , however , there is an abundance of available machinery of coordination -- in NATO , in O.E.C.D. , in the U.N. and elsewhere . The trouble with this machinery is that it is not used and the reason that it is not used is the absence of a conscious sense of community among the free nations . Our proper objective , then , is the development of a new spirit , the realization of a potential community . A `` concert of free nations '' should take its inspiration from the traditions of the nineteenth century Concert of Europe with its common values and accepted `` rules of the game '' . Constitutions of and by themselves mean little ; ; the history of both the League of Nations and the United Nations demonstrates that . But a powerful sense of community , even with little or no machinery , means a great deal . That is the lesson of the nineteenth century . A realistic `` concert of free nations '' might be expected to consist of an `` inner community '' of the North Atlantic nations and an `` outer community '' embracing much or all of the non-Communist world . The recent experiments in the new poetry-and-jazz movement seen by some as part of the `` San Francisco Renaissance '' have been as popular as they are notorious . `` It might well start a craze like swallowing goldfish or pee-wee golf '' , wrote Kenneth Rexroth in an explanatory note in the Evergreen Review , and he may have been right . Under the general heading `` poetry-and-jazz '' widely divergent experiments have been carried out . Lawrence Ferlenghetti and Bruce Lippincott have concentrated on writing a new poetry for reading with jazz that is very closely related to both the musical forms of jazz , and the vocabulary of the musician . Even musicians themselves have taken to writing poetry . ( Judy Tristano now has poems as well as ballads written for her . ) But the best known exploiters of the new medium are Kenneth Rexroth and Kenneth Patchen . Rexroth and Patchen are far apart musically and poetically in their experiments . Rexroth is a longtime jazz buff , a name-dropper of jazz heroes , and a student of traditional as well as modern jazz . In San Francisco he has worked with Brew Moore , Charlie Mingus , and other `` swinging '' musicians of secure reputation , thus placing himself within established jazz traditions , in addition to being a part of the San Francisco `` School '' . Although Patchen has given previous evidence of an interest in jazz , the musical group that he works with , the Chamber Jazz Sextet , is often ignored by jazz critics . ( Downbeat did not mention the Los Angeles appearance of Patchen and the Sextet , although the engagement lasted over two months . ) The stated goal of the CJS is the synthesis of jazz and `` serious '' music . Patchen's musicians are outsiders in established jazz circles , and Patchen himself has remained outside the San Francisco poetry group , maintaining a self-imposed isolation , even though his conversion to poetry-and-jazz is not as extreme or as sudden as it may first appear . He had read his poetry with musicians as early as 1951 , and his entire career has been characterized by radical experiments with the form and presentation of his poetry . However , his subject matter and basic themes have remained surprisingly consistent , and these , together with certain key poetic images , may be traced through all his work , including the new jazz experiments . From the beginning of his career , Patchen has adopted an anti-intellectual approach to poetry . His first book , Before The Brave ( 1936 ) , is a collection of poems that are almost all Communistic , but after publication of this book he rejected Communism , and advocated a pacifistic anarchy , though retaining his revolutionary idiom . He spoke for a `` proletariat '' that included `` all the lost and sick and hunted of the earth '' . Patchen believes that the world is being destroyed by power-hungry and money-hungry people . Running counter to the destroying forces in the world are all the virtues that are innate in man , the capacity for love and brotherhood , the ability to appreciate beauty . Beauty as well as love is redemptive , and Patchen preaches a kind of moral salvation . This salvation does not take the form of a Christian Heaven . In Patchen's eyes , organized churches are as odious as organized governments , and Christian symbols , having been taken over by the moneyed classes , are now agents of corruption . Patchen envisions a Dark Kingdom which `` stands above the waters as a sentinel warning man of danger from his own kind '' . The Dark Kingdom sends Angels of Death and other fateful messengers down to us with stern tenderness . Actually Heaven and the Dark Kingdom overlap ; ; they form two aspects of heavenly life after death . Patchen has almost never used strict poetic forms ; ; he has experimented instead with personal myth-making . Much of his earlier work was conceived in terms of a `` pseudo-anthropological '' myth reference , which is concerned with imaginary places and beings described in grandiloquent and travelogue-like language . These early experiments were evidently not altogether satisfying to Patchen . Beginning in Cloth Of The Tempest ( 1943 ) he experimented in merging poetry and visual art , using drawings to carry long narrative segments of a story , as in Sleepers Awake , and constructing elaborate `` poems-in-drawing-and-type '' in which it is impossible to distinguish between the `` art '' and the poetry . Art `` makings '' or pseudo-anthropological myths did not meet all of Patchen's requirements for a poetic frame of reference . Many of his poems purported to be exactly contemporary and political ; ; so during the period approximately from 1941 to 1946 , Patchen often used private detective stories as a myth reference , and the `` private eye '' as a myth hero . Speaking in terms of sociological stereotype , the `` private eye '' might appeal to the poet in search of a myth for many reasons . The private detective ( at least in the minds of listeners and readers all over the country ) is an individual hero fighting injustice . He is usually something of an underdog , he must battle the organized police force as well as recognized criminals . The private detective must rely , as the Youngest Son or Trickster Hero does in primitive myth , on his wits . The private detective is militant against injustice , a humorous and ironic explorer of the underworld ; ; most important to Patchen , he was a non-literary hero , and very contemporary . In 1945 , probably almost every American not only knew who Sam Spade was , but had some kind of emotional feeling about him . In The Memoirs Of A Shy Pornographer ( 1945 ) Patchen exploited this national sentiment by making his hero , Albert Budd , a private detective . But since 1945 , Sam Spade has undergone a metamorphosis ; ; he has become Friday on Dragnet , a mouthpiece of arbitrary police authority . He has , like so many other secular and religious culture symbols , gone over to the side of the ruling classes . Obviously , the `` private eye '' can have no more appeal for Patchen . To fill the job of contemporary hero in 1955 , Patchen needed someone else . It was logical that he would come up with the figure of the modern jazz musician . The revolution in jazz that took place around 1949 , the evolution from the `` bebop '' school of Dizzy Gillespie to the `` cool '' sound of Miles Davis and Lennie Tristano , Lee Konitz , and the whole legend of Charlie Parker , had made an impression on many academic and literary men . The differentiation between the East Coast and West Coast schools of jazz , the differences between the `` hard bop '' school of Rollins , and the `` cerebral '' experiments of Tristano , Konitz and Marsh , the general differences in the mores of white and Negro musicians , all had become fairly well known to certain segments of the public . The immense amount of interest that the new jazz had for the younger generation must have impressed him , and he began working toward the merger of jazz and poetry , as he had previously attempted the union of graphic art and poetry . In addition to his experiments in reading poetry to jazz , Patchen is beginning to use the figure of the modern jazz musician as a myth hero in the same way he used the figure of the private detective a decade ago . In this respect , his approach to poetry-and-jazz is in marked contrast to Kenneth Rexroth's . Rexroth uses many of his early poems when he reads to jazz , including many of his Chinese and Japanese translations ; ; he usually draws some kind of comparison with the jazz tradition and the poem he is reading -- for instance , he draws the parallel between a poem he reads about an Oriental courtesan waiting for the man she loves , and who never comes , and the old blues chants of Ma Rainy and other Negro singers -- but usually the comparison is specious . Rexroth may sometimes achieve an effective juxtaposition , but he rarely makes any effort to capture any jazz `` feeling '' in the text of his poems , relying on his very competent musicians to supply this feeling . Patchen does read some of his earlier works to music , but he has written an entire book of short poems which seem to be especially suited for reading with jazz . These new poems have only a few direct references to jazz and jazz musicians , but they show changes in Patchen's approach to his poetry , for he has tried to enter into and understand the emotional attitude of the jazz musician . It is difficult to draw the line between stereotype and the reality of the jazz musician . Everyone knows that private detectives in real life are not like Sam Spade and Pat Novak , but the real and the imaginary musician are closely linked . Seen by the public , the musician is the underdog par excellence . He is forced to play for little money , and must often take another job to live . His approach to music is highly individualistic ; ; the accent is on improvisation rather than arrangements . While he is worldly , the musician often cultivates public attitudes of childlike astonishment and naivete . The musician is non-intellectual and non-verbal ; ; he is far from being a literary hero , yet is a creative artist . Many of these aspects will be seen as comparable to those of the ideal detective , but where the detective is active and militant , the jazz musician is passive , almost a victim of society . In order to write with authority either about musicians , or as a musician , Patchen would have to soft pedal his characteristically outspoken anger , and change ( at least for the purposes of this poetry ) from a revolutionary to a victim . He must become one who knows all about the injustice in the world , but who declines doing anything about it . This involves a shift in Patchen's attitude and it is a first step toward writing a new jazz poetry . He has shown considerable ingenuity in adapting his earliest symbols and devices to the new work , and the fact that he has kept a body of constant symbols through all of his experiments gives an unexpected continuity to his poetry . Perhaps tracing some of these more important symbols through the body of his work will show that Patchen's new poetry is well thought out , and remains within the mainstream of his work , while being suited to a new form . Henry Miller characterized Patchen as a `` man of anger and light '' . His revolutionary anger is apparent in most of his early poems . The following passage from `` The Hangman's Great Hands '' illustrates the directness of this anger . `` Anger won't help . I was born angry . Angry that my father was being burnt alive in the mills ; ; Angry that none of us knew anything but filth and poverty . Angry because I was that very one somebody was supposed To be fighting for '' . This angry and exasperated stance which Patchen has maintained in his poetry for almost fifteen years has been successfully modulated into a kind of woe that is as effective as anger and still expresses his disapproval of the modern world . In his recent book , Hurray For Anything ( 1957 ) , one of the most important short poems -- and it is the title poem for one of the long jazz arrangements -- is written for recital with jazz . Although it does not follow the metrical rules for a blues to be sung , the phrases themselves carry a blues feeling . `` I went to the city And there I did Weep , Men a-crowing like asses , And living like sheep . Oh , can't hold the han' of my love ! ! Can't hold her little white han' ! ! Yes , I went to the city , And there I did bitterly cry , Men out of touch with the earth , And with never a glance at the sky . Oh , can't hold the han' of my love ! ! Can't hold her pure little han' ! ! '' Patchen is still the rebel , but he writes in a doleful , mournful tone . Neither of these poems is an aberration ; ; each is so typical that it represents a prominent trend in the poet's development . Patchen is repeatedly preoccupied with death . In many of his poems , death comes by train : a strongly evocative visual image . Perhaps Patchen was once involved in a train accident , and this passage from First Will And Testament may have been how the accident appeared to the poet when he first saw it -- if he did : `` Lord , love us , look at all the disconnected limbs floating hereabouts , like bloody feathers at that -- and all the eyes are talking and all the hair are moving and all the tongue are in all the cheek . Let us see just how typical Krim is . He is New York-born and Jewish . He spent one year at the University of North Carolina because Thomas Wolfe went there . He returned to New York to work for The New Yorker , to edit a Western pulp , to `` duck the war in the OWI '' , to write publicity for Paramount Pictures and commentary for a newsreel , then he began his career as critic for various magazines . Now he has abandoned all that to be A Writer . I do not want to quibble about typicality ; ; in a certain sense , one manner of experience will be typical of any given group while another will not . But I've got news for Krim : he's not typical , he's pretty special . His may typify a certain kind of postwar New York experience , but his experience is certainly not typical of his `` generation's '' . In any case , who ever thought that New York is typical of anything ? ? Men of Krim's age , aspirations , and level of sophistication were typically involved in politics before the war . They did not `` duck the war '' but they fought in it , however reluctantly ; ; they sweated out some kind of formal education ; ; they read widely and eclectically ; ; they did not fall into pseudo-glamorous jobs on pseudo-glamorous magazines , but they did whatever nasty thing they could get in order to eat ; ; they found out who they were and what they could do , then within the limits of their talent they did it . They did not worry about `` experience '' , because experience thrust itself upon them . And they traveled out of New York . Only a native New Yorker could believe that New York is now or ever was a literary center . It is a publishing and public relations center , but these very facts prevent it from being a literary center because writers dislike provincialism and untruth . Krim's typicality consists only in his New Yorker's view that New York is the world ; ; he displays what outlanders call the New York mind , a state that the subject is necessarily unable to perceive in himself . The New York mind is two parts abstraction and one part misinformation about the rest of the country and in fact the world . In his fulminating against the literary world , Krim is really struggling with the New Yorker in himself , but it's a losing battle . Closely related to his illusions about his typicality is Krim's complicated feeling about his Jewishness . He writes , `` Most of my friends and I were Jewish ; ; we were also literary ; ; the combination of the Jewish intellectual tradition and the sensibility needed to be a writer created in my circle the most potent and incredible intellectual-literary ambition I have ever seen or could ever have imagined . Within themselves , just as people , my friends were often tortured and unappeasably bitter about being the offspring of this unhappily unique-ingrown-screwedup breed ; ; their reading and thinking gave an extension to their normal blushes about appearing ' Jewish ' in subway , bus , racetrack , movie house , any of the public places that used to make the Jew of my generation self-conscious ( heavy thinkers walking across Seventh Avenue without their glasses on , willing to dare the trucks as long as they didn't look like the ikey-kikey caricature of the Yiddish intellectual ) . '' At other points in his narrative , Krim associates Jewishness with unappeasable literary ambition , with abstraction , with his personal turning aside from the good , the true , and the beautiful of fiction in the manner of James T. Farrell to the international , the false , and the inflated . Krim says , in short , that he is a suffering Jew . The only possible answer to that is , I am a suffering Franco-Irishman . We all love to suffer , but some of us love to suffer more than others . Had Krim gone farther from New York than Chapel Hill , he might have discovered that large numbers of American Jews do not find his New York version of the Jews' lot remotely recognizable . More important is the simple human point that all men suffer , and that it is a kind of anthropological-religious pride on the part of the Jew to believe that his suffering is more poignant than mine or anyone else's . This is not to deny the existence of pogroms and ghettos , but only to assert that these horrors have had an effect on the nerves of people who did not experience them , that among the various side effects is the local hysteria of Jewish writers and intellectuals who cry out from confusion , which they call oppression and pain . In their stupidity and arrogance they believe they are called upon to remind the gentile continually of pogroms and ghettos . Some of us have imagination and sensibility too . Finally , there is the undeniable fact that some of the finest American fiction is being written by Jews , but it is not Jewish fiction ; ; Saul Bellow and Bernard Malamud , through intellectual toughness , perception , through experience in fact , have obviously liberated themselves from any sentimental Krim self-indulgence they might have been tempted to . Krim's main attack is upon the aesthetic and the publishing apparatus of American literary culture in our day . Krim was able to get an advance for a novel , and time and opportunity to write at Yaddo , but it was no good . `` I had natural sock '' , he says , ' as a storyteller and was precociously good at description , dialogue , and most of the other staples of the fiction-writer's trade but I was bugged by a mammoth complex of thoughts and feelings that prevented me from doing more than just diddling the surface of sustained fiction-writing '' . And again , `` how can you write when you haven't yet read ' Bartleby The Scrivener ' '' ? ? Krim came to believe that `` the novel as a form had outlived its vital meaning '' . His `` articulate Jewish friends '' convinced him that education ( read `` reading '' ) was `` a must '' . He moved in a `` highly intellectual '' group in Greenwich Village in the late forties , becoming `` internationalized '' overnight . Then followed a period in which he wrote reviews for The New York Times Book Review , The Commonweal , Commentary , had a small piece in Partisan Review , and moved on to Hudson , The Village Voice , and Exodus . The work for Commonweal was more satisfying than work for Commentary `` because of the staff's tiptoeing fear of making a booboo '' . Commentary was a mere suburb of Partisan Review , the arch-enemy . Both magazines were `` rigid with reactionary what-will-T. S. Eliot-or-Martin Buber-think ? ? fear . '' Partisan has failed , Krim says , for being `` snob-clannish , overcerebral , Europeanish , aristocratically alienated '' from the U.S. . It was `` the creation of a monstrous historical period wherein it thought it had to synthesize literature and politics and avant-garde art of every kind with its writers crazily trying to outdo each other in Spenglerian inclusiveness . '' Kenyon , Sewanee , and Hudson operated in an `` Anglo-Protestant New Critical chill '' ; ; their example caused Krim and his friends to put on `` Englishy airs , affect all sorts of impressive scholarship and social-register unnaturalness in order to slip through their narrow transoms and get into their pages '' . Qui s'excuse s'accuse , as the French Jewish intellectuals used to say . Through all this raving , Krim is performing a traditional and by now boring rite , the attack on intelligence , upon the largely successful attempt of the magazines he castigates to liberate American writing from local color and other varieties of romantic corn . God knows that Partisan and the rest often were , and remain , guilty of intellectual flatulence . Sociological jargon , Germano-Slavic approximations to English , third-rate but modish fiction , and outrages to common sense have often disfigured Partisan , and in lesser degree , the other magazines on the list . What Krim ignores , in his contempt for history and for accuracy , is that these magazines , Partisan foremost , brought about a genuine revolution in the American mind from the mid-thirties to approximately 1950 . The most obvious characteristic of contemporary American writing , apart from the beat nonsense , is its cosmopolitanism . The process of cosmopolitanism had begun in earnest about 1912 , but the First War and the depression virtually stalled that process in its tracks . Without the good magazines , without their book reviews , their hospitality to European writers , without above all their awareness of literary standards , we might very well have had a generation of Krim's heroes -- Wolfes , Farrells , Dreisers , and I might add , Sandburgs and Frosts and MacLeishes in verse -- and then where would we be ? ? Screwed , stewed , and tattooed , as Krim might say after reading a book about sailors . When Partisan and Kenyon set up shop , Mencken was still accepted as an arbiter of taste ( remember Hergesheimer ? ? ) , George Jean Nathan and Alexander Woollcott were honored in odd quarters , and the whole Booth Tarkington , Willa Catheter ( sic ) , ) Pearl , Buck , , Amy Lowell , William Lyon Phelps atmosphere lay thick as Los Angeles smog over , the , country -- . Politics , economics , sociology -- the entire area of life that lies `` between '' -- literature and what Krim calls experience -- urgently needed to be dug into . The universities certainly were not doing it , nor were the popular magazines of the day . This Partisan above all did ; ; if it had never printed a word of literature its contribution to the politico-sociological area would still be historic . But it did print good verse and good fiction . If , the editors sometimes , dozed and printed pretentious , New , York-mind , dross , they , also printed , Malraux , , Silone , , Chiaromonte , , Gide , Bellow , , Robert Lowell , Francis Fergusson , Mary McCarthy , Delmore Schwartz , Mailer , Elizabeth Hardwick , Eleanor Clark , , and a host of , other good writers . Partisan Review and the other literary magazines helped to educate , in the best sense , an entire generation . That these magazines also deluded the Krims of the world is unfortunate but inevitable . It is a fact of life that magazines are edited by groups : they have to be or they wouldn't be published at all . And it is also a fact of life that there will always ( be youngish half-educated people around , who will be dazzled by the glitter of what looks like a literary movement . ( there are no ) literary movements , `` there are only writers doing their work . Literary movements are the '' , creation of pimps who live off writers . ) when Krim says mine was as severe a critical-intellectual , environment as can be imagined , he is off his rocker . He indicates that he has none of the , disciplines that criticism requires , including education ; ; the result was his inevitable bedazzlement through , ignorance . He wasn't being , `` educated in '' those Village bull-sessions , as he claims . No one was ever educated through bull-sessions in anything other than , to quote him again , `` perfumed bullshit . Only '' a New York hick would expect to find the literary life in Greenwich Village , at any point , later than Walt Whitman's day . The highly intellectual minds that Krim says he encountered , in the Village did their work in spite of , , not because of , any Village atmosphere . But Krim's complaint is important because not only in New York , but in other cities and in universities throughout this country , young and not , so young men at this moment are being bedazzled by half-digested ideas . Those who have quality will outgrow `` the experience ; ; the '' , rest will turn beat , or into dentists , or into beat , dentists . For the sad truth is that while one might write well without having read Bartleby The Scrivener , one is more likely , to write well if one has `` read it , and much else . The most appalling aspect of Krim's piece is his reflection of the beat aesthetic . He mentions the beats only once '' , when he refers to their having revived through mere power and abandonment and the unwillingness to , commit death in life some idea of a decent equivalent between verbal expression and actual experience , , but the entire narrative , is written in the tiresome vocabulary `` of '' that lost `` and '' dying cause , `` and in the '' `` sprung syntax that is supposed to supplant , our mother , tongue . Krim's ( aesthetic combines anti-intellectualism , conscious and unconscious naivete ) '' , and a winsome reliance `` upon the '' , natural and upon experience . Ideas are the thruway to nowhere . My `` touchstones , had , been strictly '' literature and , humanly enough , American literature ( because that was what I wanted to write ) . He alludes to something called direct writing , and he finds that criticism gets in the way of his truer , realer , imaginative bounce . There had been signs and portents like the regular toppling over and defacing of the bust of Lauro Di Bosis near the Villa Lante and in the Gianicolo . Something was happening all right , slowly it is true , but you could feel it . The Italians felt it . Little things . An Italian poet had noticed plainclothes policemen lounging around the area of Quirinal Palace , the first time since the war . At least they hadn't stepped up and asked to see papers in the hated , flat , dialect mispronunciation of Mussolini's home district -- Dogumenti , per favore . But , who knew , that might be coming one of these days . There were other Italians who still bore scars they had earned in police station basements , resisting . They laughed and , true to national form and manners , never talked long or solemnly on any subject at all , but some of them worried out loud about short memories and ghosts . We saw Giuseppe Berto at a party once in a while , tall , lean , nervous and handsome , and , in our opinion , the best novelist of them all except Pavese , and Pavese is dead . Berto's The Sky Is Red had been a small masterpiece and in its special way the best book to come out of the war . Now he was married to a beautiful girl , had a small son , and lived in an expensive apartment and worked for the movies . On his desk was a slowly accumulating treatment and script of The Count Of Monte Cristo . On his bookshelves were some of the latest American novels , including Bellow's Seize The Day , but he hadn't read them ( they were sent by American publishers ) and wasn't especially interested in what the American writers were up to . He was interested in Robert Musil's The Man Without Qualities . So were a lot of other people . He was interested in Italo Svevo . He was thinking his way into a new novel , a big one , one that people had been waiting for . It was going to be hard going all the way because he hadn't written seriously for a while , except for a few stories , was tired of the old method of realismo he had so successfully used in The Sky Is Red . This one was going to be different . He had bought a little piece of property down along the coast of the hard country of Calabria that he knew so well . He was going to do one or two more films for cash and then chuck it all , leave Rome and its intellectual cliques and money-fed life , go back to Calabria . Berto seemed worried , too . He knew all about it and had put it down in journal form in The War In A Black Shirt , a wonderful book not , for some strange reason , published in the U.S. . He knew all about the appeal of a black shirt and jackboots to a poor , southern , peasant boy . He knew all about the infection and the fever , and , too , the moment of realization when he saw for himself , threw up his hands and quit , ended the war as a prisoner in Texas . Berto knew all about Fascism . So did his friend , the young novelist Rimanelli . Rimanelli is tough and square-built and adventurous , says what he thinks . He had put it down in a war novel , The Day Of The Lion . These people were not talking much about it , but you , a foreigner , sensed their apprehension and disappointment . So there we were talking around and about it . The English lady said she had to go to Vienna for a while . It was a pity because she had planned to lay a wreath at the foot of the Garibaldi statue , towering over Rome in spectacular benediction from the highpoint of the Gianicolo . Around that statue in the green park where children play and lovers walk in twos and there is a glowing view of the whole city , in that park are the rows of marble busts of Garibaldi's fallen men , the ones who one day rushed out of the Porta San Pancrazio and , under fire all the way , up the long , straight narrow lane to take , then lose the high ground of the Villa Doria Pamphili . When they lost it , the French artillery moved in , and that was the end for Garibaldi that time , on 30 April 1849 . Once out of the gate they had charged straight up the narrow lane . We had walked it many times and shivered , figuring what a fish barrel it had been for the French . Now the park is filled with marble busts and all the streets in the immediate area have the full and proper names of the men who fell . We were at a party once and heard an idealistic young European call that awful charge glorious . Our companion was a huge , plain-spoken American sculptor who had been a sixteen-year-old rifleman all across France in 1944 . He said it was stupid butchery to order men to make a charge like that , no matter who gave the order and what for . `` Oh , it would be butchery all right '' , the European said . `` We would see it that way , but it was glorious then . It was the last time in history anybody could do something gloriously like that '' . I thought : Who is older now ? ? Old world and new world . The sculptor looked at him , bugeyed and amazed , angry . He had made an assault once with 180 men . It was a picked assault company . They went up against an SS unit of comparable size , over a little rise of ground , over an open field . Object -- a village crossroads . They made it , killed every last one of the Krauts , took the village on schedule . When it was over , eight of his company were still alive and all eight were wounded . The whole thing , from the moment when they jumped heavily off the trucks , spread out and moved into position just behind the cover of that slight rise of ground and then jumped off , took maybe between twenty and thirty minutes . The sculptor looked at him , let the color drain out of his face , grinned , and looked down into his drink , a bad Martini made with raw Italian gin . `` Bullshit '' , he said softly . `` Excuse me '' , the European said . `` I am not familiar with the expression '' . The apartment where we were talking that afternoon in March faced onto the street Garibaldi's men had charged up and along . Across the way from the apartment building is a ruined house , shot to hell that day in 1849 , and left that way as a memorial . There is a bronze wreath on the wall . Like everything else in Rome , ruins and monuments alike , that house is lived in . I have seen diapers strung across the ruined roof . The English lady really wanted to put a wreath on the Garibaldi monument on the 30th of April . She had her reasons for this . For one thing , there wasn't going to be any ceremony at all this year . There were a few reasons for that , too : Garibaldi had been taken up and exploited by the Communists nowadays . Therefore the government wanted no part of him . ( It is sort of as if our government should decide to disown Washington or Lincoln for the same reason . ) And then there were ecclesiastical matters , the matter of Garibaldi's anti-clericalism . There was a new Pope and the Vatican was making itself heard and felt these days . As it happens the English lady is a good Catholic herself , but of more liberal political persuasion . Nothing was going to be done this year to celebrate Garibaldi's bold and unsuccessful defense of Rome . All that the English lady wanted to do was to walk up to the monument and lay a wreath at its base . This would show that somebody , even a foreigner living in Rome , cared . And then there were other things . Some of the marble busts in the park are of young Englishmen who fought and died for Garibaldi . She also mentioned leaving a little bunch of flowers at the bust of Lauro Di Bosis . It is hard for me to know how I feel about Lauro Di Bosis . I suffer from mixed feelings . He was a well-to-do , handsome , and sensitive young poet . His bust shows an intense , mustached , fine-featured face . He flew over Rome one day during the early days of Mussolini and scattered leaflets over the city , denouncing the Fascists . He was never heard of again . He is thought either to have been killed by the Fascists as soon as he landed or to have killed himself by flying out to sea and crashing his plane . He was , thus , an early and spectacular victim . And there is something so wonderfully romantic about it all . He really didn't know how to fly . He had crashed on takeoff once before . Gossip had it ( for gossip is the soul of Rome ) that a famous American dancer of the time had paid for both the planes . It was absurd and dramatic . It is remembered and has been commemorated by a bust in a park and a square in the city which was renamed Piazzo Lauro Di Bosis after the war . Most Romans , even some postmen , know it by the old name . Faced with a gesture like Di Bosis' , I find usually that my sentiments are closer to those of my sculptor friend . The things that happened in police station basements were dirty , grubby , and most often anonymous . No poetry , no airplanes , no dancers . That is how the real routine of resistance goes on , and its strength is directly proportionate to the number of insignificant people who can let themselves be taken to pieces , piece by piece , without quitting . It is an ugly business and there are few , if any , wreaths for them . I keep thinking of a young woman I knew during the Occupation in Austria . She was from Prague . She had been picked up by the Russians , questioned in connection with some pamphlets , sentenced to life imprisonment for espionage . She escaped , crawled through the usual mine fields , under barbed wire , was shot at , swam a river , and we finally picked her up in Linz . She showed us what had happened to her . No airplanes , no Nathan Hale statements . Just no spot , not even a dimesize spot , on her whole body that wasn't bruised , bruise on top of bruise , from beatings . I understand very well about Lauro Di Bosis and how his action is symbolic . The trouble is that like many symbols it doesn't seem a very realistic one . The English lady wanted to pay tribute to Garibaldi and to Lauro Di Bosis , but she wasn't going to be here to do it . Were any of us interested enough in the idea to do it for her , by proxy so to speak ? ? There was a pretty thorough silence at that point . My spoon stirring coffee , banging against the side of the cup , sounded as loud as a bell . I thought : What the hell ? ? Why not ? ? I said I would do it for her . I had some reasons , too . I admire the English lady . I hate embarrassing silences and have been known to make a fool out of myself just to prevent one . I also had and have feelings about Garibaldi . Like every Southerner I can't escape the romantic tradition of brave defeats , forlorn lost causes . Though Garibaldi's fight was small shakes compared to Pickett's Charge -- which , like all Southerners , I view in almost Miltonic terms , fallen angels , etc. -- I associated the two . And to top it all I am often sentimental on purpose , trying to prove to myself that I am not afraid of sentiment . So much for all that . The English lady was pleased and enthusiastic . She gave me the names of some people who would surely help pay for the flowers and might even march up to the monument with me . The idea of the march pleased her . Maybe twenty , thirty , fifty . Maybe I could call Rimanelli at the magazine Rottosei where he worked . Thirty-three Scotty did not go back to school . His parents talked seriously and lengthily to their own doctor and to a specialist at the University Hospital -- Mr. McKinley was entitled to a discount for members of his family -- and it was decided it would be best for him to take the remainder of the term off , spend a lot of time in bed and , for the rest , do pretty much as he chose -- provided , of course , he chose to do nothing too exciting or too debilitating . His teacher and his school principal were conferred with and everyone agreed that , if he kept up with a certain amount of work at home , there was little danger of his losing a term . Scotty accepted the decision with indifference and did not enter the arguments . He was discharged from the hospital after a two-day checkup and he and his parents had what Mr. McKinley described as a `` celebration lunch '' at the cafeteria on the campus . Rachel wore a smart hat and , because she had been warned recently about smoking , puffed at her cigarettes through a long ivory holder stained with lipstick . Scotty's father sat sprawled in his chair , angular , alert as a cricket , looking about at the huge stainless-steel appointments of the room with an expression of proprietorship . Teachers -- men who wore brown suits and had gray hair and pleasant smiles -- came to their table to talk shop and to be introduced to Scotty and Rachel . Rachel was polite , Scotty indifferent . They ate the cafeteria food with its orange sauces and Scotty gazed without interest at his food , the teachers , the heroic baronial windows , and the bright ranks of college banners . His father tried to make the food a topic . `` The blueberry pie is good , Scotty . I recommend it '' . He looked at his son , his face worried . Scotty murmured , `` No , thanks '' , so softly his father had to bend his gaunt height across the table and turn a round brown ear to him . Scotty regarded the ear and the grizzled hair around it with a moment of interest . He said more loudly , `` I'm full , old Pop '' . He had eaten almost nothing on the crested , three-sectioned plate and had drunk about half the milk in its paper container . `` He's all right , Craig '' , Rachel said . `` I can fix him something later in the afternoon when we get home '' . Since his seizure , Scotty had had little appetite ; ; yet his changed appearance , surprisingly , was one of plumpness . His face was fuller ; ; his lips and the usually sharp lines of his jaw had become swollen-looking . He breathed now with his mouth open , showing a whitely curving section of lower teeth ; ; he kept his eyes , with their puffed blurred lids , always lowered , though not , apparently , focusing . Even his neck seemed thicker and , therefore , shorter . His hands , which had been as quick as a pair of fluttering birds , were now neither active nor really relaxed . They lay on his lap , palms up , stiffly motionless , the tapered fingers a little thick at the joints . Altogether he had , since the seizure , the appearance of a boy who overindulged in food and took no exercise . He looked lazy , spoiled , a little querulous . Rachel had little to say . She greeted her husband's colleagues with smiling politeness , offering nothing . Mr. McKinley , for all his sprawling and his easy familiarity , was completely alert to his son , eyes always on the still face , jumping to anticipate Scotty's desires . It was a strained , silent lunch . Rachel said , `` I'd better get him to bed '' . The doctors had suggested Scotty remain most of every afternoon in bed until he was stronger . Since Mr. McKinley had to give a lecture , Rachel and Scotty drove home alone in the Plymouth . They did not speak much . Scotty gazed out at ugly gray slums and said softly , `` Look at those stupid kids '' . It was a Negro section of peeling row houses , store-front churches and ragged children . Rachel had to bend toward Scotty and ask him to repeat . He said , `` Nothing '' . And then : `` There are lots of kids around here '' . Scotty looked at the children , his mouth slightly opened , his eyes dull . He felt tired and full and calm . Thirty-four the days seemed short , perhaps because his routine was , each day , almost the same . He rose late and went down in his bathrobe and slippers to have breakfast either alone or with Rachel . Virginia treated him with attention and tried to tempt his appetite with special food : biscuits , cookies , candies -- the result of devoted hours in the tiled kitchen . She would hover over him and , looking like her brother , anxiously watch the progress of Scotty's fork or spoon . `` You don't eat enough , honey . Try to get that down '' . Rachel , observing , would say , `` He has to rediscover his own capacity . It'll take time '' . Virginia and Rachel talked to each other quietly now , as allies who are political rather than natural might in a war atmosphere . Both watched Scotty constantly , Rachel without seeming to , Virginia openly , her eyes filled with concern . Scotty was neutral . He did not resent their supervision or Virginia's sometimes tiring sympathy . He ate what he felt like , slept as much or as little as he pleased , and moved about the draughty rooms of the house , when he was not in bed , with slow , dubious steps , like an elderly tourist in a cathedral . His energy was gone . He was able , now , to sit for hours in a chair in the living room and stare out at the bleak yard without moving . His hands lay loosely , yet stiffly -- they were like wax hands : almost lifelike , not quite -- folded in his lap ; ; his mouth hung slightly open . When he was asked a question or addressed in such a way that some response was inescapable , he would answer ; ; if , as often happened , he had to repeat because he had spoken too softly , he would repeat his words in the same way , without emphasis or impatience , only a little louder . He had not mentioned Kate . He had not even thought about her much except once or twice at night in bed when his slowly ranging thoughts would abruptly , almost accidentally , encounter her . At these times he felt a kind of pain in his upper chest , but it was an objective pain , in no way different from others in intensity and not different in kind ; ; it was like the bandaged wound on the back of his head which occasionally throbbed ; ; it was merely another part of his weakness . He was calm , drugged , and lazy . He did not care . Rachel mentioned Kate . She said , `` I notice the girl from across the street hasn't bothered to phone or visit '' . Scotty said , `` That's all right . Kate's all right '' . He thought about it briefly , then deliberately turned the talk to something else . Once , sitting at the front window in his parents' room , he saw Kate come out of her house . She was with Elizabeth . They were far off and looked tiny . The heavy branches in his front yard would hide and then reveal them . They turned at the bottom of Kate's steps and moved off in the direction of the park . He thought he saw -- it awakened and , for a moment , interested him -- that Elizabeth held a leash in her hand and that a round fuzzy puppy was on the end of the leash . Then they disappeared and Scotty got up and went into his own room and got into bed . By the time he was under the covers he had forgotten about seeing Kate . The doctor , since Scotty was no longer allowed to make his regular trips into town to see him , came often and informally to the house . He would sit , slim-waisted and spare , on the edge of Scotty's bed , his legs crossed so elaborately that the crossed foot could tap the floor . Scotty did not mind the doctor's unsmiling teasing as he used to . `` Husky young man '' , he said with mock distaste . `` I imagine you're always battling in school '' . `` I don't go to school any more '' . `` Pardon '' ? ? The doctor had to bend close to hear ; ; his delicate hand , as veined as a moth's wing , rested absently on Scotty's chest . Scotty said the same words more loudly . `` Oh . Well , we're taking a little vacation , that's all '' . He turned unsmilingly to Rachel . `` I think by the end of next week he could get out in the air a little . He could now but the weakness is very definite ; ; it would exhaust him further and unnecessarily . He'll be stronger soon '' . His stethoscope was on the table by Scotty's bed and he picked it up and wagged it at Scotty . He said fussily , `` Just keep the cap on those strong emotions '' . The stethoscope glinted silver in the darkening room . `` I'll drop by again in a few days '' . Rachel stayed on after the doctor had gone . She smoothed the covers on Scotty's bed and picked things up from the floor . She did not touch him . Scotty watched with disinterest . He did not speak . He had no desire to . She said , `` Do you think you'll miss school '' ? ? He had noticed how formal and irritably exact Rachel had grown . He did not care . He felt her irritability did not concern him , yet he knew he would not care even if it did . He shook his head . `` We've had any number of calls about you . You could win a popularity contest at that school without any trouble . Miss Estherson called twice . She wants to pay you a visit . She says the children miss you . Apparently you were the light of their lives '' . Scotty shrugged slightly . Rachel came close to the bed , bent as if she would kiss him , then moved away . She was frowning . `` That doctor annoys me '' . She seemed to speak to herself . `` Do you suppose his self-consciousness is characteristic of the new Negro professionals or merely of doctors in general '' ? ? She turned to him again . `` Well , Mrs. Charles -- Sally -- has phoned too . She was very worried '' . Rachel's tone was dry . `` She didn't really say '' -- She glanced away at the floor , then swooped gracefully and picked up one of Scotty's slippers . `` I mean , do you feel like seeing Kate '' ? ? Scotty said , `` I don't know '' . It was true . He did not . There was the slight pain , but it was no different from the throbbing in his head . `` Well , there's time , in any case . We'll wait till you're stronger and then talk about it '' . She put the slipper neatly by its mate at the foot of the bed . Scotty said , `` Okay '' . This time Rachel kissed him lightly on the forehead . Scotty was pleased . His father was a constant visitor . Scotty would hear the front door in the evening and then his father's deep slow voice ; ; it floated up the stairs . `` How's Scotty '' ? ? And Rachel's or Virginia's reply : `` better . He's getting plenty of rest '' . `` Is his appetite improved '' ? ? Or : `` Does he get exercise '' ? ? The exchange was almost invariable , and Scotty , in his bed , could hear every word of it . He never smiled . It required an energy he no longer possessed to be satirical about his father . His father would come upstairs and stand self-consciously at the foot of the bed and look at his son . After a pause , during which he studied Scotty's face as if Scotty were not there and could not study him too , Mr. McKinley would ask the same questions he had asked downstairs . Scotty would reply softly and his father , apologetically , would ask him to repeat . `` I'm eating more '' , he would say . Or : `` I walk around the house a lot '' . `` Perhaps you should get out a little '' . `` I'm not supposed to yet '' . He was not irritated . He did not mind the useless , kindly questions . He looked at the lined face with vague interest ; ; he felt he was noting it , as if it were something he might think about when he grew stronger . Mr. McKinley examined everything with critical care , seeking something material to blame for his son's illness . `` Have you got enough blankets '' ? ? And another time , without accusation : `` You never wore that scarf I bought you '' . Where their sharp edges seemed restless as sea waves thrusting themselves upward in angry motion , Papa-san sat glacier-like , his smooth solidity , his very immobility defying all the turmoil about him . `` Our objective '' , the colonel had said that day of the briefing , `` is Papa-san '' . There the objective sat , brooding over all . Gouge , burn , blast , insult it as they would , could anyone really take Papa-san ? ? Between the ponderous hulk and himself , in the valley over which Papa-san reigned , men had hidden high explosives , booby traps , and mines . The raped valley was a pregnant womb awaiting abortion . On the forward slope in front of his own post stretched two rows of barbed wire . At the slope's base coils of concertina stretched out of eye range like a wild tangle of children's hoops , stopped simultaneously , weirdly poised as if awaiting the magic of the child's touch to start them all rolling again . Closer still , regular barricades of barbed wire hung on timber supports . Was it all vain labor ? ? Who would clean up the mess when the war was over ? ? Smiling at his quixotic thoughts , Warren turned back from the opening and lit a cigarette before sitting down . Tonight a group of men , tomorrow night he himself , would go out there somewhere and wait . If he were to go with White , he would be out there two days , not just listening in the dark at some point between here and Papa-san , but moving ever deeper into enemy land -- behind Papa-san -- itself . Was this what he had expected ? ? He hadn't realized that there would be so much time to think , so many lulls . Somehow he had forgotten what he must have been told , that combat was an intermittent activity . Now he knew that the moment illuminated by the vision on the train would have to be approached . It could take place tomorrow night , or it might occur months from now . There was just too much time . Time to become afraid . White's suggestion flattered , but he did not like the identity . He did not spill over with hatred for the enemy . He hadn't even seen him yet Pressing his cigarette out in the earth , Warren walked to the slit and scanned the jagged hills . He saw no life , but still stood there for a time peering at the unlovely hills , his gaze continually returning to Papa-san . He had come here in order to test himself . While most of his beliefs were still unsettled , he knew that he did not believe in killing . Yet , he was here . He had come because he could not live out his life feeling that he had been a coward . There were ten men on the patrol which Sergeant Prevot led out that next night . The beaming ROK was carrying a thirty-caliber machine gun ; ; another man lugged the tripod and a box of ammunition . Warren and White each carried , in addition to their own weapons and ammo , a box of ammo for the ROK's machine gun . Others carried extra clips for the Browning Automatic Rifle , which was in the hands of a little Mexican named Martinez . Prevot had briefed the two new men that afternoon . `` We just sit quiet and wait '' , Prevot had said . `` Be sure the man nearest you is awake . If Joe doesn't show up , we'll all be back here at 0600 hours . Otherwise , we hold a reception . Then we pull out under our mortar and artillery cover , but nobody pulls out until I say so . Remember what I said about going out to get anybody left behind ? ? That still holds . We bring back all dead and wounded '' . At 2130 hours they had passed through the barbed wire at the point of departure . Then began the journey through their own mine fields . Mines . Ours were kinder than theirs , some said . They set bouncing betties to jump and explode at testicle level while we more mercifully had them go off at the head . Mines . Big ones and little . The crude wooden boxes of the enemy , our nicely turned gray metal disks . But theirs defied the detectors . Mines . A foot misplaced , a leg missing . Mines . All sizes : big ones , some wired to set off a whole field , little ones , hand grenade size . Booby traps to fill the head with chunks of metal . Warren tried to shake off the jumble of his fears by looking at the sky . It was dark . Prevot had said that the searchlights would be bounced off the clouds at 2230 hours , `` which gives us time to get settled in position '' . Because they were new men and to be sure that they didn't get lost , Prevot had placed Warren and White in the center of the patrol as it filed out . His eyes now fixed on White's solid figure , Warren could hear behind him the tread of another . He could also hear the stream which he had seen from his position . They were going to follow it for part of their journey . `` It's safe '' , Prevot had said , `` and it provides cover for our noise '' . Soon they were picking their way along the edge of the stream which glowed in the night . On their right rose the embankment covered with brush and trees . If a branch extended out too far , each man held it back for the next , and if they met a low overhang , each warned the other . Thus , stealthily they advanced upstream ; ; then they turned to the right , climbed the embankment , and walked into the valley again . There was no cover here , only grass sighing against pant-legs . And with each sigh , like a whip in the hand of an expert , the grass stripped something from Warren . The gentle whir of each footstep left him more naked than before , until he felt his unprotected flesh tremble , chilled by each new sound . The shapes of the men ahead of him lacked solidity , as if the whip had stripped them of their very flesh . The dark forms moved like mourners on some nocturnal pilgrimage , their dirge unsung for want of vocal chords . The warped , broken trees in the valley assumed wraith-like shapes . Clumps of brush that they passed were so many enchained demons straining in anger to tear and gnaw on his bones . Looming over all , Papa-san leered down at him , threatening a hundred hidden malevolencies . Off in the distance a searchlight flashed on , its beam slashing the sky . The sharp ray was absorbed by a cloud , then reflected to the earth in a softer , diffused radiance . Somewhere over there another patrol had need of light . Warren thought of all the men out that night who , like himself , had left their protective ridge and -- fear working at their guts -- picked their way into the area beyond . From the east to the west coast of the Korean peninsula was a strip of land in which fear-filled men were at that same moment furtively crawling through the night , sitting in sweaty anticipation of any movement or sound , or shouting amidst confused rifle flashes and muzzle blasts . White's arm went up and Warren raised his own . The patrol was stopping . Prevot came up `` . Take that spot over there '' , he whispered , pointing to a small clump of blackness . `` Give me your machine gun ammo '' . Warren handed him the metal box and Prevot quietly disappeared down the line . Lying in the grass behind the brush clump , Warren looked about . The others likewise had hidden themselves in the grass and the brush . Over his shoulder he could see Prevot with the machine gun crew . Even at this short distance they were only vague shapes , setting up the machine gun on a small knoll so that it could fire above the heads of the rest of the patrol . Warren eased his rifle's safety off and gently , slowly sneaked another clip of ammunition from one of the cloth bandoleers that marked the upper part of his body with an Aj . This he placed within quick reach . The walk and his fears had served to overheat him and his sweaty armpits cooled at the touch of the night air . Although the armored vest fitted the upper part of his body snugly , he felt no security . Figures seemed to crouch in the surrounding dark ; ; in the distance he saw a band of men who seemed to advance and retreat even as he watched . Certain this menace was only imaginary , he yet stared in fascinated horror , his hand sticky against the stock of his weapon . He was aware of insistent inner beatings , as if prisoners within sought release from his rigid body . Above , the glowing ivory baton of their searchlight pointed at the clouds , diluting the valley's dark to a pallid light . Then the figures which held his attention became a group of shattered trees , standing like the grotesques of a medieval damnation scene . Even so , he could not ease the tension of his body ; ; the rough surface of the earth itself seemed to resist every attempt on his part to relax . Sensing the unseen presence of the other men in the patrol , he felt mutely united to these nine near-strangers sharing this pinpoint of being with him . He sensed something precious in the perilous moment , something akin to the knowledge gained on his bicycle trip through the French countryside , a knowledge imprisoned in speechlessness . -- In France he had puzzled the meaning of the great stone monuments men had thrown up to the sky , and always as he wandered , he felt a stranger to their exultation . They were poems in a strange language , of which he could barely touch a meaning -- enough to make his being ache with the desire for the fullness he sensed there . Brittany , that stone-gray mystery through which he traveled for thirty days , sleeping in the barns of farmers or alongside roads , had worked some subtle change in him , he knew , and it was in Brittany that he had met Pierre . Pierre had no hands ; ; they had been severed at the wrists . With leather cups fitted in his handlebars , he steered his bicycle . He and Warren had traveled together for four days . They visited the shipyards at Brest and Pierre had to sign the register , vouching for the integrity of the visiting foreigner . He took the pen in his stumps and began to write . `` Wait ! ! Wait '' ! ! Cried the guard who ran from the hut to shout to other men standing about outside . They crowded the small room and peered over one another's shoulders to watch the handless man write his name in the book . `` C'est formidable '' , they exclaimed . `` Mais , oui . C'est merveilleux '' . And then the questions came , eager , interested questions , and many compliments on his having overcome his infirmity . `` Doesn't it ever bother you '' , Warren had asked , `` to have people always asking you about your hands '' ? ? `` Oh , the French are a very curious people '' , Pierre had laughed . `` They are also honest seekers after truth . Now the English are painfully silent about my missing hands . They refuse to mention or to notice that they are not there . The Americans , like yourself , take the fact for granted , try to be helpful , but don't ask questions . I'm used to all three , but I think the French have the healthiest attitude '' . That was the day that Pierre had told Warren about the Abbey of Solesmes . `` You are looking tired and there you can rest . It will be good for you . I think , too '' , he said , his dark eyes mischievous , `` that you will find there some clue to the secret of the cathedrals about which you have spoken '' . Within two weeks Warren was ringing the bell at the abbey gate . The monk who opened the door immediately calmed his worries about his reception : `` I speak English '' , the old man said , `` but I do not hear it very well '' . He smiled and stuck a large finger with white hairs sprouting on it into his ear as though that might help . Smiling at Warren's protestations , the old monk took his grip from him and led him down a corridor to a small parlor . `` Will you please wait in here . Mickie sat over his second whisky-on-the-rocks in a little bar next to the funeral parlor on Pennsylvania Avenue . Al's Little Cafe was small , dark , narrow , and filled with the mingled scent of beer , tobacco smoke , and Italian cooking . Hanging over the bar was an oil painting of a nude Al had accepted from a student at the Corcoran Gallery who needed to eat and drink and was broke . The nude was small and black-haired and elfin , and was called `` Eloise '' . This was one place where Moonan could go for a drink in a back booth without anyone noticing him , or at least coming up and hanging around and wanting to know all the low-down . The other patrons were taxi drivers and art students and small shopkeepers . The reporters had not yet discovered that this was his hideaway . His friend Jane was with him . She was wise enough to realize a man could be good company even if he did weigh too much and didn't own the mint . She was the widow of a writer who had died in an airplane crash , and Mickie had found her a job as head of the historical section of the Treasury . This meant sorting out press clippings and the like . Jane sat receptive and interested . Mickie had a pleasant glow as he said , `` You see , both of them , I mean the President and Jeff Lawrence , are romantics . A romantic is one who thinks the world is divinely inspired and all he has to do is find the right key , and then divine justice and altruism will appear . It's like focusing a camera ; ; the distant ship isn't there until you get the focus . You know what I'm talking about . I'm sure all girls feel this way about men until they live with them . `` But when it comes to war , the Colonel knows what it is and Jeff doesn't . Mr. Christiansen knows that a soldier will get the Distinguished Service Medal for conduct that would land him in prison for life or the electric chair as a civilian . He had a mean , unbroken sheer bastard in his outfit , and someone invented the name Trig for him . That's to say , he was trigger happy . He'd shoot at anything if it was the rear end of a horse or his own sentry . He was a wiry , inscrutable , silent country boy from the red clay of rural Alabama , and he spoke with the broad drawl that others normally make fun of . But not in front of Trig . I heard of some that tried it back in the States , and he'd knock them clear across the room . There'd been a pretty bad incident back at the Marine base . A New York kid , a refugee from one of the Harlem gangs , made fun of Trig's accent , and drew a knife . Before the fight was over , the Harlem boy had a concussion and Trig was cut up badly . They caught Trig stealing liquor from the officers' mess , and he got a couple of girls in trouble . The fear of punishment just didn't bother him . It wasn't there . It was left out of him at birth . This is why he made such a magnificent soldier . He wasn't troubled with the ordinary , rank-and-file fear that overcomes and paralyzes and sends individual soldiers and whole companies under fire running in panic . It just didn't occur to Trig that anything serious would happen to him . Do you get the picture of the kind of fellow he was '' ? ? Jane nodded with a pleasant smile . `` All right . There was a sniper's nest in a mountain cave , and it was picking off our men with devilish accuracy . The Colonel ordered that it be wiped out , and I suggested , ' You ask for volunteers , and promise each man on the patrol a quart of whisky , ten dollars and a week-end pass to Davao . Trig was one of the five volunteers . The patrol snaked around in back of the cave , approached it from above and dropped in suddenly with wild howls . You could hear them from our outpost . There was a lot of shooting . We knew the enemy was subdued , because a flare was fired as the signal . So we hurried over . Two of our men were killed , a third was wounded . Trig and a very black colored boy from Detroit had killed or put out of action ten guerrillas by grenades and hand-to-hand fighting . When we got there , Trig and the Negro were quarreling over possession of a gold crucifix around the neck of a wounded Filipino . The colored boy had it , and Trig lunged at him with a knife and said , ' Give that to me , you black bastard . We don't 'low nigras to walk on the same sidewalk with white men where I come from . `` The Negro got a bad slice on his chest from the knife wound '' . `` What did the Colonel do about the men '' ? ? Jane asked in her placid , interested way . Mickie laughed . `` He recommended both of them for the DSM and the Detroit fellow for the Purple Heart , too , for a combat-inflicted wound . So you see Mr. Christiansen knows what it's all about . But not Jeff Lawrence . When he was in the war , he was in Law or Supplies or something like that , and an old buddy of his told me he would come down on Sundays to the Pentagon and read the citations for medals -- just like the one we sent in for Trig -- and go away with a real glow . These were heroes nine feet tall to him '' . Jefferson Lawrence was alone at the small , perfectly appointed table by the window looking out over the river . He had dinner and sat there over his coffee watching the winding pattern of traffic as it crossed the bridge and spread out like a serpent with two heads . Beside him was Mrs. Dalloway . He thought how this dainty , fragile older woman threading her way through the streets of Westminster on a day in June , enjoying the flowers in the shops , the greetings from old friends , but never really drawing a deep , passionate breath , was so like himself . He , and Mrs. Dalloway , too , had never permitted themselves the luxury of joys that dug into the bone marrow of the spirit . He had not because he was both poor and ambitious . Poverty imposes a kind of chastity on the ambitious . They cannot stop to grasp and embrace and sit in the back seat of cars along a dark country lane . No , they must look the other way and climb one more painful step up the ladder . He made the decision with his eyes open , or so he thought . At any cost , he must leave the dreary Pennsylvania mining town where his father was a pharmacist . And so he had , so he had . At State College , he had no time to walk among the violets on the water's edge . From his room he could look out in springtime and see the couples hand in hand walking slowly , deliciously , across the campus , and he could smell the sweet vernal winds . He was not stone . He was not unmoved . He had to teach himself patiently that these traps were not for him . He must mentally pull the blinds and close the window , so that all that existed was in the books before him . At law school , the same . More of this stamping down of human emotion as a young lawyer in New York . By the time he was prosperous enough -- his goals were high -- he was bald and afraid of women . The only one who would have him was his cripple , the strange unhappy woman who became his wife . Perhaps it was right ; ; perhaps it was just . He had dared to defy nature , to turn his back to the Lorelei , and he was punished . Like Mrs. Dalloway , with her regrets about Peter Walsh , he had his moments of melancholy over a youth too well spent . If he had had a son , he would tell him , `` Gather ye rosebuds while ye may This same flower that smiles today tomorrow will be dying '' . But then his son could afford it . Lawrence was waiting for Bill Boxell . The Vice President had called and asked if he could see the Secretary at his home . He said the matter was urgent . The Secretary was uneasy about the visit . He did not like Boxell . He suspected something underhanded and furtive about him . Lawrence could not put his finger on it precisely , and this worried him . When you disliked or distrusted a man , you should have a reason . Human nature was not a piece of meat you could tell was bad by its smell . Lawrence stared a minute at the lighted ribbon of traffic , hoping that a clue to his dislike of the Vice President would appear . It did not . Therefore , he decided he was unfair to the young man and should make an effort to understand and sympathize with his point of view . A half hour later the Vice President arrived . He looked very carefully at every piece of furnishing , as though hoping to store this information carefully in his mind . He observed the Florentine vase in the hall , the Renoir painting in the library , as well as the long shelves of well-bound volumes ; ; the pattern of the Oriental rug , the delicate cut-glass chandelier . He said to the Secretary , `` I understand you came from a little Pennsylvania town near Wilkes-Barre . How did you find out about this '' ? ? He waved his arm around at the furnishings . It was not a discourteous question , Lawrence decided . This young man had so little time to learn he had to be curious ; ; he had to find out . The Secretary did not tell him at what cost , at what loneliness , he learned these things . He merely said , `` Any good decorator these days can make you a tasteful home '' . The Vice President said , `` If you hear of any names that would fix me cheap in return for advertising they decorated the Vice President's home , let me know . I can do business with that kind '' . Again , Lawrence thought a little sadly , these were the fees of poverty and ambition . Boxell did not have the chance to grow up graciously . He had to acquire everything he was going to get in four years . They had brandy in the library . Boxell looked at Lawrence with a searching glance , the kind that a prosecuting attorney would give a man on trial . What are your weaknesses ? ? Where will you break ? ? How best to destroy your peace ? ? The Vice President said with a slight bluster , `` There isn't anyone who loves the President more than I do . Old Chris is my ideal . At the same time , you have to face facts and realize that a man who's been in the Marine Corps all his life doesn't understand much about politics . What does a monk know about sex '' ? ? Lawrence listened with the practiced , deceptive calm of the lawyer , but his face was in the shadow . `` So , we have to protect the old man for his own good . You see what I mean . Congress is full of politicians , and if you want to get along with them , you have to be politic . This is why I say we just can't go ahead and disarm the Germans and pull down our own defenses . Let me tell you what happened to me today . A fellow came up to me , a Senator , I don't have to tell you his name , and he told me , ' I love the President like a brother , but God damn it , he's crucifying me . I've got a quarter of a million Germans in my state , and those krautheads tune in on Father Werther every night , and if he tells them to go out and piss in the public square , that's what they do . He's telling them now to write letters to their Congressmen opposing the disarmament of Germany . And another one comes to me and he says , ' Look here , there's a mill in my state employs five thousand people making uniforms for the Navy . The Bishop looked at him coldly and said , `` Take it or leave it '' ! ! Literally , there was nothing else to do . He was caught in a machine . But Sojourner was not easily excited or upset and said quite calmly : `` Let's go and see what it's like '' . Annisberg was about seventy-five miles west of Birmingham , near the Georgia border and on the Tallahoosa River , a small and dirty stream . The city was a center of manufacture , especially in textiles , and also because of the beauty of some of its surroundings , a residence for many owners of the great industries in north Alabama . But it had , as was usual in southern cities of this sort , a Black Bottom , a low region near the river where the Negroes lived -- servants and laborers huddled together in a region with no sewage save the river , where streets and sidewalks were neglected and where there was much poverty and crime . Wilson came by train from Birmingham and looked the city over ; ; the rather pleasant white city was on the hill where the chief stores were . Beyond were industries and factories . Then they went down to Black Bottom . In the midst of this crowded region was the Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church . It was an old and dirty wooden structure , sadly in need of repair . But it was a landmark . It had been there 50 years or more and everybody in town , black and white , knew of it . It had just suffered a calamity , the final crisis in a long series of calamities . For the old preacher who had been there twenty-five years was dead , and the city mourned him . He was a loud-voiced man , once vigorous but for many years now declining in strength and ability . He was stern and overbearing with his flock , but obsequious and conciliatory with the whites , especially the rich who partly supported the church . The Deacon Board , headed by a black man named Carlson , had practically taken over as the pastor grew old , and had its way with the support of the Amen corner . The characteristic thing about this church was its Amen corner and the weekly religious orgy . A knot of old worshippers , chiefly women , listened weekly to a sermon . It began invariably in low tones , almost conversational , and then gradually worked up to high , shrill appeals to God and man . And then the Amen corner took hold , re-enacting a form of group participation in worship that stemmed from years before the Greek chorus , spreading down through the African forest , overseas to the West Indies , and then here in Alabama . With shout and slow dance , with tears and song , with scream and contortion , the corner group was beset by hysteria and shivering , wailing , shouting , possession of something that seemed like an alien and outside force . It spread to most of the audience and was often viewed by visiting whites who snickered behind handkerchief and afterward discussed Negro religion . It sometimes ended in death-like trances with many lying exhausted and panting on chair and floor . To most of those who composed the Amen corner it was a magnificent and beautiful experience , something for which they lived from week to week . It was often re-enacted in less wild form at the Wednesday night prayer meeting . Wilson , on his first Sunday , witnessed this with something like disgust . He had preached a short sermon , trying to talk man-to-man to the audience , to tell them who he was , what he had done in Macon and Birmingham , and what he proposed to do here . He sympathized with them on the loss of their old pastor . But then , at mention of that name , the Amen corner broke loose . He had no chance to say another word . At the very end , when the audience was silent and breathless , a collection was taken and then slowly everyone filed out . The audience did not think much of the new pastor , and what the new pastor thought of the audience he did not dare at the time to say . During the next weeks he looked over the situation . First of all there was the parsonage , an utterly impossible place for civilized people to live in , originally poorly conceived , apparently not repaired for years , with no plumbing or sewage , with rat-holes and rot . It was arranged that he would board in the home of one of the old members of the church , a woman named Catt who , as Wilson afterward found , was briefly referred to as The Cat because of her sharp tongue and fierce initiative . Ann Catt was a lonely , devoted soul , never married , conducting a spotless home and devoted to her church , but a perpetual dissenter and born critic . She soared over the new pastor like an avenging angel lest he stray from the path and not know all the truth and gossip of which she was chief repository . Then Wilson looked over the church and studied its condition . The salary of the pastor had for years been $500 annually and even this was in arrears . Wilson made up his mind that he must receive at least $2,500 , but when he mentioned this to the Deacons they said nothing . The church itself must be repaired . It was dirty and neglected . It really ought to be rebuilt , and he determined to go up and talk to the city banks about this . Meanwhile , the city itself should be talked to . The streets in the colored section were dirty . There was typhoid and malaria . The children had nowhere to go and no place to play , not even sidewalks . The school was small , dark and ill-equipped . The teacher was a pliant fool . There were two liquor saloons not very far from the church , one white , that is conducted for white people with a side entrance for Negroes ; ; the other exclusively Negro . Undoubtedly , there was a good deal of gambling in both . On the other side of the church was a quiet , well-kept house with shutters and recently painted . Wilson inquired about it . It was called Kent House . The deacon of the church , Carlson , was its janitor . One of the leading members of the Amen corner was cook ; ; there were two or three colored maids employed there . Wilson was told that it was a sort of hotel for white people , which seemed to him rather queer . Why should a white hotel be set down in the center of Black Bottom ? ? But nevertheless it looked respectable . He was glad to have it there . The rest of Black Bottom was a rabbit warren of homes in every condition of neglect , disrepair and careful upkeep . Dives , carefully repaired huts , and nicely painted and ornamented cottages were jumbled together cheek by jowl with little distinction . The best could not escape from the worst and the worst nestled cosily beside the better . The yards , front and back , were narrow ; ; some were trash dumps , some had flower gardens . Behind were privies , for there was no sewage system . After looking about a bit , Wilson discovered beyond Black Bottom , across the river and far removed from the white city , a considerable tract of land , and it occurred to him that the church and the better Negro homes might gradually be moved to this plot . He talked about it to the Presiding Elder . The Presiding Elder looked him over rather carefully . He was not sure what kind of a man he had in hand . But there was one thing that he had to stress , and that was that the contribution to the general church expenses , the dollar money , had been seriously falling behind in this church , and that must be looked after immediately . In fact , he intimated clearly that that was the reason that Wilson had been sent here -- to make a larger contribution of dollar money . Wilson stressed the fact that clear as this was , they must have a better church , a more business-like conduct of the church organization , and an effort to get this religious center out of its rut of wild worship into a modern church organization . He emphasized to the Presiding Elder the plan of giving up the old church and moving across the river . The Presiding Elder was sure that that would be impossible . But he told Wilson to `` go ahead and try '' . And Wilson tried . It did seem impossible . The bank which held the mortgage on the old church declared that the interest was considerably in arrears , and the real estate people said flatly that the land across the river was being held for an eventual development for white working people who were coming in , and that none would be sold to colored folk . When it was proposed to rebuild the church , Wilson found that the terms for a new mortgage were very high . He was sure that he could do better if he went to Atlanta to get the deal financed . But when this proposal was made to his Deacon Board , he met unanimous opposition . The church certainly would not be removed . The very proposition was sacrilege . It had been here fifty years . It was going to stay forever . It was hardly possible to get any argument on the subject . As for rebuilding , well , that might be looked into , but there was no hurry , no hurry at all . Wilson again went downtown to a different banker , an intelligent young white man who seemed rather sympathetic , but he shook his head . `` Reverend '' , he said , `` I think you don't quite understand the situation here . Don't you see the amount of money that has been invested by whites around that church ? ? Tenements , stores , saloons , some gambling , I hope not too much . The colored people are getting employment at Kent House and other places , and they are near their places of employment . When a city has arranged things like this you cannot easily change them . Now , if I were you I would just plan to repair the old church so it would last for five or ten years . By that time , perhaps something better can be done '' . Then Wilson asked , `` What about this Kent House which you mention ? ? I don't understand why a white hotel should be down here '' . The young banker looked at him with a certain surprise , and then he said flatly : `` I'm afraid I can't tell you anything in particular about Kent House . You'll have to find out about it on your own . Hope to see you again '' . And he dismissed the colored pastor . It was next day that Sojourner came and sat beside him and took his hand . She said , `` My dear , do you know what Kent House is '' ? ? `` No '' , said Wilson , `` I don't . I was just asking about it . What is it '' ? ? `` It's a house of prostitution for white men with white girls as inmates . They hire a good deal of local labor , including two members of our Trustee Board . They buy some supplies from our colored grocers and they are patronized by some of the best white gentlemen in town '' . Wilson stared at her . `` My dear , you must be mistaken '' . `` Talk to Mrs. Catt '' , she said . And after Wilson had talked to Mrs. Catt and to others , he was absolutely amazed . This , of course , was the sort of thing that used to take place in Southern cities -- putting white houses of prostitution with colored girls in colored neighborhoods and carrying them on openly . But it had largely disappeared on account of protest by the whites and through growing resentment on the part of the Negroes as they became more educated and got better wages . But this situation of Kent House was more subtle . The wages involved were larger and more regular . The inmates were white and from out of town , avoiding local friction . The backing from the white town was greater and there was little publicity . Good wages , patronage and subscription of various kinds stopped open protest from Negroes . And yet Wilson knew that this place must go or he must go . And for him to leave this job now without accomplishing anything would mean practically the end of his career in the Methodist church , if not in all churches . Payne dismounted in Madison Place and handed the reins to Herold . There was a fog , which increased the darkness of the night . Two gas lamps were no more than a misleading glow . He might have been anywhere or nowhere . The pretence was that he was delivering a prescription from Dr. Verdi . Secretary of State Seward was a sick man . The idea had come from Herold , who had once been a chemist's clerk . The sick were always receiving medicines . No one would question such an errand . The bottle was filled up with flour . Before Payne loomed the Old Clubhouse , Seward's home , where Key had once been killed . Now it would have another death . From the outside it was an ordinary enough house of the gentry . He clomped heavily up the stoop and rang the bell . Like the bell at Mass , the doorbell was pitched too high . It was still Good Friday , after all . A nigger boy opened the door . Payne did not notice him . He was thinking chiefly of Cap . If their schedules were to synchronize , there was no point in wasting time . He pushed his way inside . For a moment the hall confused him . This was the largest house he had ever been in , almost the largest building , except for a hotel . He had no idea where Seward's room would be . In the half darkness the banisters gleamed , and the hall seemed enormous . Above him somewhere were the bedrooms . Seward would be up there . He explained his errand , but without bothering much to make it plausible , for he felt something well up in him which was the reason why he had fled the army . He did not really want to kill , but as in the sexual act , there was a moment when the impulse took over and could not be downed , even while you watched yourself giving way to it . He was no longer worried . Everything would be all right . He knew that in this mood he could not be stopped . Still , the sensation always surprised him . It was a thrill he felt no part in . He could only watch with a sort of gentle dismay while his body did these quick , appalling , and efficient things . He brushed by the idiotic boy and lumbered heavily up the stairs . They were carpeted , but made for pumps and congress gaiters , not the great clodhoppers he wore . The sound of his footsteps was like a muffled drum . At the top of the stairs he ran into somebody standing there angrily in a dressing gown . He stopped and whispered his errand . Young Frederick Seward held out his hand . Panting a little , Payne shook his head . Dr. Verdi had told him to deliver his package in person . Frederick Seward said his father was sleeping , and then went through a pantomime at his father's door , to prove the statement . `` Very well '' , Payne said . `` I will go '' . He smiled , but now that he knew where the elder Seward was , he did not intend to go . He pulled out his pistol and fired it . It made no sound . It had misfired . Reversing it , he smashed the butt down on Frederick Seward's head , over and over again . It was the first blow that was always difficult . After that , violence was exultantly easy . He got caught up into it and became a different person . Only afterwards did an act like that become meaningless , so that he would puzzle over it for days , whereas at the time it had seemed quite real . The nigger boy fled down the stairs , screaming , `` Murder '' . It was not murder at all . Payne was more methodical than that . He was merely clearing a way to what he had to do . He ran for the sick room , found his pistol was broken , and threw it away . A knife would do . From childhood he had known all about knives . Someone blocked the door from inside . He smashed it in and tumbled into darkness . He saw only dimly moving figures , but when he slashed them they yelled and fled . He went for the bed , jumped on it , and struck where he could , repeatedly . It was like finally getting into one's own nightmares to punish one's dreams . Two men pulled him off . Nobody said anything . Payne hacked at their arms . There was a lady there , in a nightdress . He would not have wanted to hurt a lady . Another man approached , this one fully dressed . When the knife went into his chest , he went down at once . `` I'm mad '' , shouted Payne , as he ran out into the hall . `` I'm mad '' , and only wished he had been . That would have made things so much easier . But he was not mad . He was only dreaming . He clattered down the stairs and out of the door . Somewhere in the fog , the nigger boy was still yelling murder . One always wakes up , even from one's own dreams . The clammy air revived him . Herold , he saw , had fled . Well , one did not expect much of people like Herold . He unhitched his horse , walked it away , mounted , and spurred it on . The nigger boy was close behind him . Then the nigger boy turned back and he was alone . He rode on and on . He had no idea where he was . After some time he came to an open field . An open field was better than a building , that was for sure , so he dismounted , turned off the horse , and plunged through the grass . He felt curiously sleepy , the world seemed far away ; ; he knew he should get to Cap , but he didn't know how . He was sure , for he had done as he was told , hadn't he ? ? Cap would find him and take care of him . So choosing a good tree , he clambered up into it , found a comfortable notch , and curled up in it to sleep , like the tousled bear he was , with his hands across his chest , as though surfeited with honey . Violence always made him tired , but he was not frightened . In Boston , Edwin Booth was winding up a performance of A New Way To Pay Old Debts . It was a part so familiar to him that he did not bother to think about it any more . Acting soothed him . On a stage he always knew what to do , and tonight , to judge by the applause , he must be doing it better than usual . As Sir Giles Overreach ( how often had he had to play that part , who did not believe a word of it ) , he raised his arm and declaimed : `` Where is my honour now '' ? ? That was one of the high spots of the play . The audience , as usual , loved it . He was delighted to see them so happy . If he had any worries , it was only the small ones , about Mother in New York , and his daughter Edwina and what she might be doing at this hour , with her Aunt Asia , in Philadelphia . Everyone is ambivalent about his profession , if he has practised it long enough , but there were still moments when he loved the stage and all those unseen people out there , who might cheer you or boo you , but that was largely , though not entirely , up to you . They made the world seem friendly somehow , though he knew it was not . 7 , Wilkes was quite right about one thing . Laura Keene had been in the green room . The commotion had brought her into the wings . Since she could not act , one part suited her as well as any other , and so she was the first person to offer Mr. Lincoln a glass of water , holding it up to the box , high above her head , to Miss Harris , who had asked for it . She had been one of the first to collect her wits . It was not so much that the shot had stunned the audience , as that they had been stunned already . Most of them had seen Our American Cousin before , and unless Miss Keene was on stage , there was not much to it . The theatre was hot and they were drugged with boredom . The stage had been empty , except for Harry Hawk , doing his star monologue . The audience was fond of Harry Hawk , he was a dear , in or out of character , but he was not particularly funny . At the end of the monologue the audience would applaud . Meanwhile it looked at the scenery . `` Well , I guess I know enough to turn you inside out , you sockdologizing old mantrap '' ! ! Said Trenchard , otherwise Hawk . There was always a pause here , before the next line . That was when the gun went off . Yet even that explosion did not mean much . Guns were going off all over Washington City these days , because of the celebrations , and the theatre was not soundproof . Then the audience saw a small , dim figure appear at the edge of the Presidential box . `` Sic semper tyrannis '' , it said mildly . Booth had delivered his line . Behind him billowed a small pungent cloud of smoke . They strained forward . They had not heard what had been said . They had been sitting too long to be able to stand up easily . The figure leapt from the box , almost lost its balance , the flag draped there tore in the air , the figure landed on its left leg , fell on its hands , and pressed itself up . Harry Hawk still had his arm raised towards the wings . His speech faltered . He did not lower his arm . The figure was so theatrically dressed , that it was as though a character from some other play had blundered into this one . The play for Saturday night was to be a benefit performance of The Octoroon . This figure looked like the slave dealer from that . But it also looked like a toad , hopping away from the light . There was something maimed and crazy about its motion that disturbed them . Then it disappeared into the wings . Harry Hawk had not shifted position , but he at last lowered his arm . Mrs. Lincoln screamed . There was no mistaking that scream . It was what anyone who had ever seen her had always expected her to do . Yet this scream had a different note in it . That absence of an urgent self-indulgence dashed them awake like a pail of water . Clara Harris , one of the guests in the box , stood up and demanded water . Her action was involuntary . When something unexpected happened , one always asked for water if one were a woman , brandy if one were a man . Mrs. Lincoln screamed again . In the Presidential box someone leaned over the balustrade and yelled : `` He has shot the President '' ! ! That got everybody up . On the stage , Harry Hawk began to weep . Laura Keene brushed by him with the glass of water . The crowd began to move . In Washington City everyone lived in a bubble of plots , and one death might attract another . It was not exactly panic they gave way to , but they could not just sit there . The beehive voices , for no one could bear silence , drowned out the sound of Mrs. Lincoln's weeping . At the rear of the auditorium , upstairs , some men tried to push open the door to the box corridor . It would not give . A Dr. Charles Taft clambered up on the stage and got the actors to hoist him up to the box . In the audience a man named Ferguson lost his head and tried to rescue a little girl from the mob , on the same principle which had led Miss Harris to demand water . Someone opened the corridor door from the inside , and called for a doctor . Somehow Dr. Charles Leale was forced through the mob and squeezed out into the dingy corridor . He went straight to the Presidential box . As usual , Mrs. Lincoln had lost her head , but nobody blamed her for doing so now . There was a little blood on the hem of her dress , for the assassin had slashed Miss Harris's companion , Major Rathbone , with a knife . Rathbone said he was bleeding to death . By the look of him he wasn't that far gone . With a sneer , the man spread his legs and , a third time , confronted them . Once more , Katie reared , and whinnied in fear . For a moment , boy and mount hung in midair . Stevie twisted and , frantically , commanded the mare to leap straight ahead . But the stranger was nimbler still . With a bold arm , he dared once more to obstruct them . Katie reared a third time , then , trembling , descended . The stranger leered . Seizing the bridle , he tugged with all his might and forced Katie to her knees . It was absurd . Stevie could feel himself toppling . He saw the ground coming up -- and the stranger's head . With incredible ferocity , he brought his fists together and struck . The blow encountered silky hair and hard bone . The man uttered a weird cry , spun about , and collapsed in the sand . Katie scrambled to her feet , Stevie agilely retaining his seat . Again Katie reared , and now , wickedly , he compelled her to bring her hooves down again and again upon the sprawled figure of the stranger . He could feel his own feet , iron-shod , striking repeatedly until the body was limp . He gloated , and his lips slavered . He heard himself chortling . They rode around and around to trample the figure into the sand . Only the top of the head , with a spot bare and white as a clamshell , remained visible . Stevie was shouting triumphantly . A train hooted . Instantly , he chilled . They were pursuing him . He was frightened ; ; his fists clutched so tightly that his knuckles hurt . Then Katie stumbled , and again he was falling , falling ! ! `` Stevie ! ! Stevie '' ! ! His mother was nudging him , but he was still falling . His head hung over the boards of Katie's stall ; ; before it was sprawled the mangled corpse of the bearded stranger . `` Stevie , wake up now ! ! We're nearly there '' . He had been dreaming . He was safe in his Mama's arms . The train had slowed . Houses winked as the cars rolled beside a little depot . `` Po' Chavis '' ! ! The trainman called . He came by and repeated , `` Po' Chavis '' ! ! Chapter 6 Bong ! ! Bong ! ! Startled him awake . The room vibrated as if a giant hand had rocked it . Bong ! ! A dull boom and a throbbing echo . The walls bulged , the floor trembled , the windowpanes rattled . He stared at the far morning , expecting a pendulum to swing across the horizon . Bong ! ! He raced to the window and yanked at the sash . Bong ! ! The wood was old , the paint alligatored . Bong ! ! A fresh breeze saluted him . Six o'clock ! ! He put his head out . There was the slate roof of the church ; ; ivy climbed the red brick walls like a green-scaled monster . The clock which had struck presented an innocent face . In the kitchen Mama was wiping the cupboards . `` There's a tower and a steeple on the church a million feet high . And the loudest clock in the whole world '' ! ! `` I know , Stephen '' , she smiled . `` They say that our steeple is one hundred and sixty-two feet high . The clock you heard strike -- it's really the town clock -- was installed last April by Mrs. Shorter , on her birthday '' . He dressed , and sped outdoors . He crossed Broome Street to Orange Square . The steeple leaned backward , while the church advanced like a headless creature in a long , shapeless coat . The spire seemed to hold up the sky . Port Jervis , basking in the foothills , was the city of God . The Dutch Reformed Church , with two steeples and its own school was on Main Street ; ; the Episcopal Church was one block down Sussex Street ; ; the Catholic Saint Mary's Church , with an even taller steeple and a cross on top , stood on Ball Street . The Catholics had the largest cemetery , near the Neversink River where Main Street ran south ; ; Stevie whistled when he passed these alien grounds . God was everywhere , in the belfry , in the steeple , in the clouds , in the trees , and in the mountains hulking on the horizon . Somewhere , beyond , where shadows lurked , must be the yawning pit of which Papa preached and the dreadful Lake of Fire . So , walking in awe , he became familiar with God , who resided chiefly in Drew Centennial Church with its high steeple and clock . There was no church like Drew Church , no preacher like Papa , who was intimate with Him , and could consign sinners to hellfire . To know God he must follow in Papa's footsteps . He was fortunate , and proud . The veterans , idling on their benches in the Square , beneath the soldiers' monument , got to their feet when Papa approached : `` Morning , Reverend '' ! ! His being and His will -- Stevie could not divide God from his Papa -- illumined every parish face , turned the choir into a band of angels , and the pulpit into the tollgate to Heaven . `` We have nine hundred and eleven members in our charge '' , Mama announced , `` and three hundred and eighty Sunday-school scholars '' . When Papa went out to do God's work , Stevie often accompanied him in the buggy , which was drawn by Violet , the new black mare . Although they journeyed westerly as far as Germantown , beyond the Erie roundhouse and the machine shop , and along the Delaware and Hudson Canal , and northward to Brooklyn , below Point Peter , he could see the church spire wherever he looked back . Sometimes they went south and rolled past the tollhouse -- `` Afternoon , Reverend '' ! ! -- and crossed the suspension bridge to Matamoras ; ; that was Pennsylvania . In the Delaware River , three long islands were overgrown with greening trees and underbrush . South of Laurel Grove Cemetery , and below the junction of the Neversink and the Delaware , was the Tri-State Rock , from which Stevie could spy New Jersey and Pennsylvania , as well as New York , simply by spinning around on his heel . On these excursions , Papa instructed him on man's chief end , which was his duty to God and his own salvation . However , a boy's lively eyes might rove . Where Cuddleback Brook purled into the Neversink was a magnificent swimming hole . Papa pointed a scornful finger at the splashing youth : `` Idle recreation '' ! ! Stevie saw no idols ; ; it troubled him that he couldn't always see what Papa saw . He was torn between the excitement in the sun-inflamed waters and a little engine chugging northward on the Monticello Branch . `` Where you been today '' ? ? Ludie inquired every evening , pretending that he did not care . `` He'll make a preacher out of you '' ! ! `` No , he won't '' ! ! Stevie flared . `` Not me '' ! ! `` Somebody's got to be a preacher in the family . He made a will and last testament before we left Paterson . I heard them ! ! Uncle and Aunt Howe were the witnesses '' . `` Will he die '' ? ? `` Everybody does '' . Ludie could be hateful . To speak of Papa dying was a sin . It could never happen as long as God was alert and the Drew steeple stood guard with its peaked lance . Stevie was constantly slipping into the church . He pulled with all his strength at the heavy , brass-bound door , and shuffled along the wainscoted wall . The cold , mysterious presence of God was all around him . At the end of a shaft of light , the pews appeared to be broad stairs in a long dungeon . Far away , standing before a curtained window in the study room , was his father , hands tucked under his coattails , and staring into the dark church . The figure was wreathed in an extraordinary luminescence . The boy shuddered at the deathly pale countenance with its wrinkles and gray hair . Would Papa really die ? ? The mouth was thin-lipped and wide , the long cleft in the upper lip like a slide . When Papa's slender fingers removed the spectacles , there were red indentations on the bridge of the strong nose . `` It's time you began to think on God , Stephen . Perhaps one day He will choose you as He chose me , long ago . Therefore , give Him your affection and store up His love for you . Open your heart to Him and pray , Stephen , pray ! ! For His mercy and His guidance to spare you from evil and eternal punishment in the Lake of Fire '' . Stevie had heard these words many times , yet on each occasion they caused him to tremble . For he feared the Lake of Fire . He strove to think of God and His eternal wrath ; ; he must pray to be spared . Papa was disappointed that none of the brothers had heard the Call . Not George , Townley , or Ted , certainly not Ludie . Burt was at Hackettstown and Will at Albany Law School , where they surely could not hear it . Someday God would choose him . He would hear the Call and would run to tell Papa . The stern face would relax , the black-clad arms would embrace him , `` My son '' ! ! Yet how might he know the Call when it came ? ? Probably , as in Scriptures , a still , small voice would whisper . It would summon him once ; ; if he missed it , never again . What if it came when he was playing , or was asleep and dreaming ? ? He must not fail to hear it . He was Papa's chosen ; ; therefore , nothing but good could happen to him , even in God's wrathful storms . When the skies grew dark and thunder rolled across the valley , he was unafraid . Aggie might fly into a closet , shut the door and bury her head in the clothes ; ; he dared to wait for the lightning . Lightning could strike you blind if you were a sinner ! ! But he was good . He clenched his fists and faced the terror . Thunder crashed ; ; barrels tumbled down the mountainsides , and bounced and bounced till their own fury split them open . Lightning might strike the steeples of the other churches ; ; not of Drew Church . A flash illumined the trees as a crooked bolt twigged in several directions . Violet whinnied from the stable . He ran out into the downpour , sped across the yard and into the buggy room . `` Don't be afraid , Violet '' ! ! He shouted , and was aghast at the echoes . `` Don't you be afraid '' ! ! He would save her . If there was a fire or a flood he would save Mama first and Violet next . Drenched and shaking , he stood near the sweet-smelling stall and dared to pat her muzzle . `` Don't you be afraid , Violet '' ! ! After the storm , the sky cleared blue and cool , and fragrant air swept the hills . When the sun came out , Stevie strode proudly into Orange Square , smiling like a landlord on industrious tenants . The fountain had brimmed over , the cannon were wet , the soldiers' monument glistened . Even before the benches had dried , the Civil War veterans were straggling back to their places . The great spire shone as if the lightning had polished it . He jumped . The pointed shadow had nearly touched him . He trailed Ludie to the baseball game in the lot on Kingston Street near the Dutch Reformed . `` Go on home '' ! ! Ludie screeched at him . `` Someone'll tell Papa '' ! ! No one told on Ludie , not even when he slipped live grasshoppers into the mite-box . Ludie did as he pleased . Ludie took his slingshot and climbed to the rooftop to shoot at crows . Ludie chewed roofer's tar . Ludie had a cigar box full of marbles and shooters , and a Roman candle from last Fourth of July . Ludie hopped rides on freight cars , and was chased by Mr. Yankton , the railroad guard . He came home overheated , ran straight to the ice-chest , and gulped shivery cold water . Stevie envied him . That Ludie ! ! He , too , cocked his cap at a jaunty angle , jingled marbles in his pocket , and swaggered down Main Street . On the Christophers' lawn , little girls in white pinafores were playing grownups at a tea party . A Newfoundland sat solemnly beside a doghouse half his size . Stevie yearned for a dog . He wondered whether God had a dog in the sky . He meandered down Pike Street , past the First National Bank with its green window shades . He crossed the tracks to Delaware House , where ladies in gay dresses and men in straw boaters and waxed mustaches crowded the verandah . A tall lady , with a ruffled collar very low on her bosom , turned insolent green eyes upon him . She was taller than Aggie . She was so beautiful with her rosy mouth and haughty air that she had to be wicked . Fiddles screeched ; ; a piano tinkled . `` P. J. '' -- as Ludie called the town -- was crowded with summer people who came to the mountains to escape the heat in the big cities . They stayed at hotels and boardinghouses , or at private homes . Rich people went to Delaware House , Opera House , American House or Fowler House . If the crummy bastard could write ! ! That's how it should be . It's those two fucken niggers ! ! Krist , I wish they could write ! ! Nigger pussy . He thought of sweet wet nigger pussy . Oh , sweet land of heaven , haint there just nothin like sweet nigger pussy ! ! He thought of her , the first one . He had caught her coming out of the shack . She was a juicy one . Oh how they bounced ! ! Fresh , warm , sweet and juicy , sweet lovin sixteen , she was . Man , how I love nigger pussy ! ! The snow came a little faster now , he noted . He thought of Joe Harris , the nigger who had gone after his sister . He chuckled , the memory vivid . Jee-sus , We Fixed him ! ! Yooee , we fixed him ! ! The snow again . If only the fucken weather wasn't so lousy ! ! Goddamn niggers , Lord . What I have to put up with ! ! Sonuvabitch , I can't figure out what in hell for they went and put niggers in my squad for . Only one worth a shit , and that's Brandon . He ain't so bad . His thoughts turned to other things . The big shock everybody had when they found ol Slater and those others done for . Kaboom for . He had been pretty scared himself , wondering what the hell was coming off . But he soon saw which way the ball was bouncing . Soon came back to his senses . `` I soon came back to my senses '' , he said , aloud , to the young blizzard , proudly , drawing himself up , as if making a report to some important superior . I was the first to get my squad on the ball , and anybody thinkin it was easy is pretty damn dumb . Look at thum . That goddamn redheader was the worst . He kept sayin , not me , not me , I don't wanta wind up like em . But I told him , goddammit . `` I told him '' , he said aloud They'll get the guys that done it . That'll put the place back to normal . Normal , by God . Maybe it's a good thing it happened . Maybe they'll stop it now , once for all . Clean the place up . They're doin it now . I hear the whole bunch is croakin out in the snow . They'll get the guys that done it . There was something troubling him though : as yet they hadn't Five days . Keerist . Prickly twinges of annoyance ran through him . His eyes blinked hard , snapping on and squashing some bad things that were trying to push their way into him . A tune began to whirl inside his head . One of his favorites : `` Guitar Boogie '' . It always came on , faithfully , just like a radio or juke box , whenever he started to worry too much about something , when the bad things tried to push their way into him . The music drove them off , or away , and he was free to walk on air in a very few moments , humming and jiving within , beating the rhythm within . He glowed with anticipation about what would happen to the culprits when they caught them . Turn the bastards over to me -- to me and my boys -- no nigger ever got what would be comin to them -- reactionary bastards . He had never heard the word reactionary before his life as a POW began . It was a word he was proud of , a word that meant much to him , and he used it with great pleasure , almost as if it were an exclusive possession , and more : he sensed himself to be very highly educated , four cuts above any of the folks back home . `` Four cuts at least '' , he chuckled to himself , `` and I owe it all to them '' . The word also made him feel hate , sincere hate , for those so labeled . He used it very effectively when he wanted to get his squad on the ball . It came up again and again in the discussion sessions . Lousy Reactionary bastards been tryin to fuck up the Program for months . Months . Hired , hard lackeys of the Warmongering capitalists . Not captured , sent here . To fuck up the program . You guys remember that . Remember that He heard himself haranguing them . He saw himself before them delivering the speech . He laughed , suddenly , feeling a surge of power telling him of his hold over them , seeing himself before them , receiving utmost respect and attention . One day , Ching had told him ( smiling , patting him on the back ) as they walked to the weekly conference of squad leaders , `` Keep it up , your squad is good , one of the best , keep it up , keep up the good work '' . He would ! ! That was really something , coming from Ching . `` Really something '' , he said , aloud . Dirty Reactionary bastards comin down here in the night and bumpin off ol Slater and those other poor bastards . `` They'll get them by God and let them bring them down here to me , just let them , God , I'll slice their balls right off . '' His arm moved swiftly , violently , once , twice . He felt intense satisfaction . He was tingling within . Before him , mutilated , bleeding to death , they lay . It was as if it had been done . `` Bastards '' , he said aloud , spitting on them . He halted , and looked around . Rivers of cold sweat were suddenly unleashed within him . The thought came back , the one nagging at him these past four days . He tried to stifle it . But the words were forming . He knew he couldn't . He braced himself . Somebody'll hafta start thinkin . He fought it , seeking to kill the last few words , but on they came out . He was trembling , a strange feeling upon him , fully expecting some catastrophe to strike him dead on the spot . But it didn't . And he took heart ; ; the final word came forth . Now he heard it , fully ; ; `` bout takin his place '' He listened , waited , nothing happened . He felt good . His old self . The music arrived , taking him its rhythm . Stroked him , snaked all through him , the lyrics lifted him , took him from one magic isle to another , stopping briefly at each Brandon . He is good . Damn good . But a nigger . Johnson . Jesus , the guy says he is trying . But he isn't with it , not at all with it . When I talked to Ching about it , he said , Everyone can learn , if he is not a Reactionary or lazy . No one is stupid . That's what he said . He oughta know . It is plain as hell Johnson is no reactionary . So you're not tryin , Johnson , you bastard you . He looked over at him , lying there , asleep , and he felt a wave of revulsion . How he loathed him . Sleepy-eyed , soft-spoken Johnson , Biggest thorn in my side of the whole fucken squad . He was the guy what always goofed at Question Time . Why couldn't they have dumped him off on someone else ? ? Why me ? ? Why didn't the damn Reactionaries bump him off ? ? Why Slater ? ? Like a particle drawn to a magnet he returned to that which was pressing so hard in his mind . The music surged up , but it failed to check it . Who is the man to take His place ? ? The guy with most on the Ball . Most on the ball . Handle men . Thoroughly Wised up . Knows the score With a supreme effort , he broke it off . He turned to the window again . A gnawing and gnashing within him . The snow was tumbling down furiously now . Huge glob-flakes hitting the ground , piling higher and higher . He stared at it , amazed , alarmed . The whole fucken sky's cavin in ! ! Keeeerist ! ! Lookit it ! ! Cover the whole building , bury us all , by nightfall . Jesus ! ! Somebody , got to be somebody If I don't put my two cents in soon , somebody else will I know they're waitin only for one thing : for the bastards what done it to be nailed . Maybe they already got them . He was again tingling with pleasure , seeing himself clearly in Slater's shoes . Top dog , sleeping and eating right there with the Staff . Ching , Tien , all of them . Top dog . Poor ol Slater . Jesus , imagine , the crummy bastards , they'll get em , they'll get what's comin to em . He whirled about suddenly . It was nothing , though his heart was thumping wildly . Somebody was up . That was all . `` Boy , you're stirrin early '' , a sleepy voice said . `` Yehhh '' , said Coughlin , testily , eyeing him up and down . `` Lookit that come down , willya '' , said the man , scratching himself , yawning . `` Yehhh '' , said Coughlin , practically spitting on him . The man moved away . That's the way . They'll toe the line . Goddamn it . Keep the chatter to a minimum , short answers , one word , if possible . Less bull the more you can do with em . That's Brown's trouble . All he does is to bullshit with his squad , and they are the stupidest bastards around . Just about to get their asses kicked into hut Seven . Plenty of room there now . All those dumb 8-Balls croaked . You can do anything with these dumb fucks if you know how . Anything . They'd cut their mothers' belly open . Give um the works . See , he's already snapping it up , the dumb jerk . Coughlin grinned , feeling supremely on top of things . He watched the snow once again . It infuriated him . It made no sense to him . He whirled around , suddenly hot all over , finding the man who had been standing before him a few moments back , nailing him to the spot on which he now stood , open-mouthed . `` You , Listen ! ! -- name William Foster's Four Internal Contradictions in Capitalism . Quick -- Quick -- now '' ! ! The man shrank before the hot fury , searching frantically for the answer . Finnegan woke up . There was a hell of a noise this time of morning . He stared out the window . For Christ's sake ! ! The whole fucken sky's caved in ! ! He looked for the source of the noise that had awakened him . It was that prick Coughlin . What the hell was he up to now ? ? Why didn't he drop dead ? ? How did they miss him when they got Slater ? ? How ? ? Then he was asking himself the usual early morning questions : What the Hell am I doin here ? ? Is this a nut-house ? ? Am I nuts ? ? Is this for real ? ? Am I dreamin ? ? From somewhere in the hut came Coughlin's voice . `` How long did you study ? ? How long , buddy '' ? ? `` For Christ's sake '' ! ! A voice pleaded . `` Don't Christsake me , buddy ! ! Just answer . C'mon -- 'mon ! ! '' I'm no hero . Did I start the damn war ? ? Automatically , Finnegan started going over today's lesson . Capitalism rots from the core . Did I start the damn war ? ? Who did ? ? That's a good one . I thought I knew . Why don't Uncle Sam mind his own fucken business ? ? I'll bet both together did . I bet . So fuck them both . Goddamn . Goddammit . Just let me go home to Jersey , back to the shore , oh , Jesus , the shore . The waves breakin in on you and your girl at night there on the warm beach in the moonlight . If I hafta do this to stay alive by God I'll do it . I hated the goddamn army from the first day I got in anyhow . All pricks like Coughlin run it anyway , one way or another . Fuck them . He rolled over and tried to shut out the noise , now much louder . He snuggled into the blanket . Brandon dreamed . He was sitting on top of a log which was spinning round and around in the water . A river , wide as the Missouri , where it ran by his place . The log was spinning . But he was not . So what ? ? Why should I be spinning just because the goddamn log is spinning ? ? ( he asked this out loud , but no one heard it over the other noise in the hut ) . Over on the bank , the west bank , a man stood , calling to him . He couldn't make out what he was saying . No doubt it had to do with the log . Why should he be concerned ? ? Rousseau is so persuasive that Voltaire is almost convinced that he should burn his books , too . But while the two men are riding into the country , where they are going to dinner , they are attacked in the dark of the forest by a band of thieves , who strip them of everything , including most of their clothes . `` You must be a very learned man '' , says Voltaire to one of the bandits . `` A learned man '' ? ? The bandit laughs in his face . But Voltaire perseveres . He goes to the chief himself . `` At what university did you study '' ? ? He asks . He refuses to believe that the bandit chief never attended a higher institution . `` To have become so corrupt '' , he says , `` surely you must have studied many arts and sciences '' . The chief , annoyed by these questions , knocks Voltaire down and shouts at him that he not only never went to any school , but never even learned how to read . When finally the two bedraggled men reach their friend's home , Voltaire's fears are once again aroused . For it is such a distinguished place , with such fine works of art and such a big library , that there can be little doubt but that the owner has become depraved by all this culture . To Voltaire's surprise , however , their host gives them fresh clothes to put on , opens his purse to lend them money and sits them down before a good dinner . Immediately after dinner , however , Rousseau asks for still another favor . Could he have pen and paper , please ? ? He is in a hurry to write another essay against culture . Such was the impromptu that Voltaire gave to howls of laughter at Sans Souci and that was soon circulated in manuscript throughout the literary circles of Europe , to be printed sometime later , but with the name of Timon of Athens , the famous misanthrope , substituted for that of Rousseau . How cruel ! ! But at the same time how understandable . How could the rich , for whom life was made so simple , ever understand the subterfuges , the lies , the frauds , the errors , sins and even crimes to which the poor were driven in their efforts to overcome the great advantages the rich had in the race of life ? ? How , for example , could a Voltaire understand the strange predicament in which a Rousseau would find himself when , soon after the furor of his first Discourse , he acquired still another title to fame ? ? This time as a musician . As a composer . Ever since he had first begun to study music and to teach it , Rousseau had dreamed of piercing through to fame as the result of a successful opera . But his facility in this genre was not great . And his efforts to get a performance for his Gallant Muses invariably failed . And for good reasons . His operatic music had little merit . But then one day , while on a week's visit to the country home of a retired Swiss jeweler , Rousseau amused the company with a few little melodies he had written , to which he attached no great importance . He was really amazed to discover the other guests so excited about these delicate little songs . `` Put a few such songs together '' , they urged him . `` String them onto some sort of little plot , and you'll have a delightful operetta '' . He didn't believe them . `` Nonsense '' , he said . `` This is the sort of stuff I write and then throw away '' ! ! `` Heaven forbid '' ! ! Cried the ladies , enchanted by his music . `` You must make an opera out of this material '' . And they wouldn't leave off arguing and pleading until he had promised . Oh , the irony and the bitterness of it ! ! That after all his years of effort to become a composer , he should now , now when he was still stoutly replying to the critics of his Discourse on the Arts and Sciences , be so close to a success in music and have to reject it . Or at least appear to reject it ! ! But what else could he do ? ? You couldn't on the one hand decry the arts and at the same time practice them , could you ? ? Well , yes , perhaps in literature , since you could argue that you couldn't keep silent about your feelings against literature and so were involved in spite of yourself . But now music too ? ? No . That would be too much ! ! And the fault , of course , was Rameau's . The fault was Rameau's and that of the whole culture of this Parisian age . For it was Rameau's type of music that he had been trying to write , and that he couldn't write . These little songs , however , were sweet nothings from the heart , tender memories of his childhood , little melodies that anyone could hum and that would make one want to weep . But no . He couldn't appear as a composer now . That glory , craved for so long , was now forbidden to him . Still , just for the ladies , and just for this once , for this one weekend in the country , he would make a little piece out of his melodies . The ladies were delighted and Jean Jacques was applauded . And everyone went to work to learn the parts which he wrote . But then , after the little operetta had been given its feeble amateur rendering , everyone insisted that it was too good to be lost forever , and that the Royal Academy of Music must now have the manuscript in order to give it the really first-rate performance it merited . Rousseau was aware that he must seem like a hypocrite , standing there and arguing that he could not possibly permit a public performance . The ladies especially couldn't understand what troubled him . A contradiction ? ? Bah , what was a contradiction in one's life ? ? Every woman has had the experience of saying no when she meant yes , and saying yes when she meant no . Rousseau had to admit that though he couldn't agree to a public performance , he would indeed , just for his own private satisfaction , dearly love to know how his work would sound when done by professional musicians and by trained voices . `` I'd simply like to know if it is as good as you kind people seem to think '' , he said . Duclos , the historian , pointed out to Jean Jacques that this was impossible . The musicians of the Royal Opera would not rehearse a work merely to see how it would sound . Merely to satisfy the author's curiosity . Rousseau agreed . But he recalled that Rameau had once had a private performance of his opera Armide , behind closed doors , just for himself alone . Duclos understood what was bothering Rousseau : that the writer of the Prosopopoeia of Fabricius should now become known as the writer of an amusing little operetta . That would certainly be paradoxical . But Duclos thought he saw a way out . `` Let me do the submitting to the Royal Academy '' , he suggested . `` Your name will never appear . No one will even suspect that it is your work '' . To that Rousseau could agree . But now what crazy twists and turns of his emotions ! ! Afraid at one and the same time that his work might be turned down -- which would be a blow to his pride even though no one knew he was the author -- and that the work would be accepted , and then that his violent feelings in the matter would certainly betray how deeply concerned he was in spite of himself . And how anxious this lover of obscurity was for applause ! ! And thus torn between his desire to be known as the composer of a successful opera and the necessity of remaining true to his proclaimed desire for anonymity , Rousseau suffered through several painful weeks . All these emotions were screwed up to new heights when , after acceptance and the first rehearsals , there ensued such a buzz of excitement among Parisian music lovers that Duclos had to come running to Rousseau to inform him that the news had reached the superintendent of the King's amusements , and that he was now demanding that the work be offered first at the royal summer palace of Fontainebleau . Imagine the honor of it ! ! `` What was your answer '' ? ? Jean Jacques asked , striving to appear unimpressed . `` I refused '' , Duclos said . `` What else could I do ? ? Monsieur De Cury was incensed , of course . But I said I would first have to get the author's permission . And I was certain he would refuse '' . How infuriating all this was ! ! Why had not this success come to him before he had plunged into his Discourse , and before he had committed himself to a life of austerity and denial ? ? Now , when everything was opening up to him -- even the court of Louis 15 ! ! -- he had to play a role of self-effacement . Back and forth Duclos had to go , between M. De Cury and Jean Jacques and between the Duke D'Aumont and Jean Jacques again , as his little operetta , The Village Soothsayer , though still unperformed , took on ever more importance . And of course the news of who the composer was did finally begin to get around among his closest friends . But they , naturally , kept his secret well , and the public at large knew only of a great excitement in musical and court circles . How titillating it was to go among people who did not know him as the composer , but who talked in the most glowing terms of the promise of the piece after having heard the first rehearsals . The furor was such that people who could not possibly have squirmed their way into the rehearsals were pretending that they were intimate with the whole affair and that it would be sensational . And listening to such a conversation one morning while taking a cup of chocolate in a cafe , Rousseau found himself bathed in perspiration , trembling lest his authorship become known , and at the same time dreaming of the startling effect he would make if he should proclaim himself suddenly as the composer . He felt himself now , as he himself says in his Confessions , at a crucial point of his life . And that was why , on the day of the performance , when a carriage from the royal stables called to take him to the palace , he did not bother to shave . On the contrary , he was pleased that his face showed a neglect of several days . Seeing him in that condition , and about to enter the hall where the King , the Queen , the whole royal family and all the members of the highest aristocracy would be present , Grimm and the Abbe Raynal and others tried to stop him . `` You can't go in that way '' ! ! They cried . `` Why not '' ? ? Jean Jacques asked . `` Who is going to stop me '' ? ? `` You haven't dressed for the occasion '' ! ! They pointed out to him . `` I'm dressed as I always am '' , Rousseau said . `` Neither better nor worse '' . `` At home , yes '' , they argued . `` But here you are in the palace . There's the King . And Madame De Pompadour '' . `` If they are here , then surely I have the right to be here '' , Rousseau said . `` And even more right . Since I am the composer '' ! ! `` But in such a slovenly condition '' . `` What is slovenly about me '' ? ? Rousseau asked . `` Is it because of my slovenliness that hair grows on my face ? ? Surely it would grow there whether I washed myself or not . A hundred years ago I would have worn a beard with pride . And those without beards would have stood out as not dressed for the occasion . Now times have changed , and I must pretend that hair doesn't grow on my face . That's the fashion . And fashion is the real king here . Not Louis 15 , , since even he obeys . Now , if you don't mind , I should like to hear my own piece performed '' . But of course behind his boldness he didn't feel bold at all . He trembled lest his piece should fail . And this in addition to his usual fear of being among people of high society , his fear of making some inane or inappropriate remark . And even deeper than that : his fear lest in this closed hall he should suddenly itch to relieve himself . Could he walk out in the midst of his piece ? ? Here , before the court ? ? Before the King ? ? It was the first time any of us had laughed since the morning began . The rider from Concord was as good as his word . He came spurring and whooping down the road , his horse kicking up clouds of dust , shouting : `` They're a-coming ! ! By God , they're a-coming , they are '' ! ! We heard him before he ever showed , and we heard him yelling after he was out of sight . Solomon Chandler hadn't misjudged the strength of his lungs , not at all . I think you could have heard him a mile away , and he was bursting at every seam with importance . I have observed that being up on a horse changes the whole character of a man , and when a very small man is up on a saddle , he'd like as not prefer to eat his meals there . That's understandable , and I appreciate the sentiment . As for this rider , I never saw him before or afterwards and never saw him dismounted , so whether he stood tall or short in his shoes , I can't say ; ; but I do know that he gave the day tone and distinction . The last thing in the world that resembled a war was our line of farmers and storekeepers and mechanics perched on top of a stone wall , and this dashing rider made us feel a good deal sharper and more alert to the situation . We came down off the wall as if he had toppled all of us , and we crouched behind it . I have heard people talk with contempt about the British regulars , but that only proves that a lot of people talk about things of which they are deplorably ignorant . Whatever we felt about the redcoats , we respected them in terms of their trade , which was killing ; ; and I know that I , myself , was nauseated with apprehension and fear and that my hands were soaking wet where they held my gun . I wanted to wipe my flint , but I didn't dare to , the state my hands were in , just as I didn't dare to do anything about the priming . The gun would fire or not , just as chance willed . I put a lot more trust in my two legs than in the gun , because the most important thing I had learned about war was that you could run away and survive to talk about it . The gunfire , which was so near that it seemed just a piece up the road now , stopped for long enough to count to twenty ; ; and in that brief interval , a redcoat officer came tearing down the road , whipping his horse fit to kill . I don't know whether he was after our rider , who had gone by a minute before , or whether he was simply scouting conditions ; ; but when he passed us by , a musket roared , and he reared his horse , swung it around , and began to whip it back in the direction from which he had come . He was a fine and showy rider , but his skill was wasted on us . From above me and somewhere behind me , a rifle cracked . The redcoat officer collapsed like a punctured bolster , and the horse reared and threw him from the saddle , except that one booted foot caught in the stirrup . Half crazed by the weight dragging , the dust , and the heat , the horse leaped our wall , dashing out the rider's brains against it , and leaving him lying there among us -- while the horse crashed away through the brush . It was my initiation to war and the insane symphony war plays ; ; for what had happened on the common was only terror and flight ; ; but this grinning , broken head , not ten feet away from me , was the sharp definition of what my reality had become . And now the redcoats were coming , and the gunfire was a part of the dust cloud on the road to the west of us . I must state that the faster things happened , the slower they happened ; ; the passage and rhythm of time changed , and when I remember back to what happened then , each event is a separate and frozen incident . In my recollection , there was a long interval between the death of the officer and the appearance of the first of the retreating redcoats , and in that interval the dust cloud over the road seems to hover indefinitely . Yet it could not have been more than a matter of seconds , and then the front of the British army came into view . It was only hours since I had last seen them , but they had changed and I had changed . In the very front rank , two men were wounded and staggered along , trailing blood behind them . No drummers here , no pipers , and the red coats were covered with a fine film of dust . They marched with bayonets fixed , and as fixed on their faces was anger , fear , and torment . Rank after rank of them came down the road , and the faces were all the same , and they walked in a sea of dust . `` Committeemen , hold your fire ! ! Hold your fire '' ! ! A voice called , and what made it even more terrible and unreal was that the redcoat ranks never paused for an instant , only some of them glancing toward the stone wall , from behind which the voice came . The front of their column had already passed us , when another officer came riding down the side of the road , not five paces from where we were . My Cousin Simmons carried a musket , but he had loaded it with bird shot , and as the officer came opposite him , he rose up behind the wall and fired . One moment there was a man in the saddle ; ; the next a headless horror on a horse that bolted through the redcoat ranks , and during the next second or two , we all of us fired into the suddenly disorganized column of soldiers . One moment , the road was filled with disciplined troops , marching four by four with a purpose as implacable as death ; ; the next , a cloud of gun smoke covered a screaming fury of sound , out of which the redcoat soldiers emerged with their bayonets and their cursing fury . In the course of this , they had fired on us ; ; but I have no memory of that . I had squeezed the trigger of my own gun , and to my amazement , it had fired and kicked back into my shoulder with the force of an angry mule ; ; and then I was adding my own voice to the crescendo of sound , hurling more vile language than I ever thought I knew , sobbing and shouting , and aware that if I had passed water before , it was not enough , for my pants were soaking wet . I would have stood there and died there if left to myself , but Cousin Simmons grabbed my arm in his viselike grip and fairly plucked me out of there ; ; and then I came to some sanity and plunged away with such extraordinary speed that I outdistanced Cousin Simmons by far . Everyone else was running . Later we realized that the redcoats had stopped their charge at the wall . Their only hope of survival was to hold to the road and keep marching . We tumbled to a stop in Deacon Gordon's cow hole , a low-lying bit of pasture with a muddy pool of water in its middle . A dozen cows mooed sadly and regarded us as if we were insane , as perhaps we were at that moment , with the crazy excitement of our first encounter , the yelling and shooting still continuing up at the road , and the thirst of some of the men , which was so great that they waded into the muddy water and scooped up handfuls of it . Isaac Pitt , one of the men from Lincoln , had taken a musket ball in his belly ; ; and though he had found the strength to run with us , now he collapsed and lay on the ground , dying , the Reverend holding his head and wiping his hot brow . It may appear that we were cruel and callous , but no one had time to spend sympathizing with poor Isaac -- except the Reverend . I know that I myself felt that it was a mortal shame for a man to be torn open by a British musket ball , as Isaac had been , yet I also felt relieved and lucky that it had been him and not myself . I was drunk with excitement and the smell of gunpowder that came floating down from the road , and the fact that I was not afraid now , but only waiting to know what to do next . Meanwhile , I reloaded my gun , as the other men were doing . We were less than a quarter of a mile from the road , and we could trace its shape from the ribbon of powder smoke and dust that hung over it . Wherever you looked , you saw Committeemen running across the meadows , some away from the road , some toward it , some parallel to it ; ; and about a mile to the west a cluster of at least fifty Militia were making their way in our direction . Cousin Joshua and some others felt that we should march toward Lexington and take up new positions ahead of the slow-moving British column , but another group maintained that we should stick to this spot and this section of road . I didn't offer any advice , but I certainly did not want to go back to where the officer lay with his brains dashed out . Someone said that while we were standing here and arguing about it , the British would be gone ; ; but Cousin Simmons said he had watched them marching west early in the morning , and moving at a much brisker pace it had still taken half an hour for their column to pass , what with the narrowness of the road and their baggage and ammunition carts . While this was being discussed , we saw the militia to the west of us fanning out and breaking into little clusters of two and three men as they approached the road . It was the opinion of some of us that these must be part of the Committeemen who had been in the Battle of the North Bridge , which entitled them to a sort of veteran status , and we felt that if they employed this tactic , it was likely enough the best one . Mattathias Dover said : `` It makes sense . If we cluster together , the redcoats can make an advantage out of it , but there's not a blessed thing they can do with two or three of us except chase us , and we can outrun them '' . That settled it , and we broke into parties of two and three . Cousin Joshua Dover decided to remain with the Reverend and poor Isaac Pitt until life passed away -- and he was hurt so badly he did not seem for long in this world . I went off with Cousin Simmons , who maintained that if he didn't see to me , he didn't know who would . `` Good heavens , Adam '' , he said , `` I thought one thing you'd have no trouble learning is when to get out of a place '' . `` I learned that now '' , I said . We ran east for about half a mile before we turned back to the road , panting from the effort and soaked with sweat . There was a clump of trees that appeared to provide cover right up to the road , and the shouting and gunfire never slackened . Under the trees , there was a dead redcoat , a young boy with a pasty white skin and a face full of pimples , who had taken a rifle ball directly between the eyes . Three men were around him . They had stripped him of his musket and equipment , and now they were pulling his boots and jacket off . Cousin Simmons grabbed one of them by the shoulder and flung him away . `` God's name , what are you to rob the dead with the fight going on '' ! ! Cousin Simmons roared . They tried to outface him , but Joseph Simmons was as wide as two average men , and it would have taken braver men than these were to outface him . That summer the gambling houses were closed , despite the threats of Pierre Ameaux , a gaming-card manufacturer . Dancing was no longer permitted in the streets . The Bordel and other places of prostitution were emptied . The slit breeches had to go . Drunkenness was no longer tolerated . In defiance , a chinless reprobate , Jake Camaret , marched down the aisle in St. Peter's one Sunday morning , followed by one of the women from the Bordel , whose dress and walk plainly showed the lack of any shame . Plunking themselves down on the front bench , they turned to smirk at those around them . John's first impulse was to denounce their blasphemy . But the thought occurred that God would want this opportunity used to tell them about Him . Calmly he opened the Bible and read of the woman at the well . He finished the worship service as if there had been no brazen attempt to dishonor God and man . The next morning , as the clock struck nine , he appeared at the Council meeting in the Town Hall and insisted that the couple would have to be punished if the Church was to be respected . `` I have told you before , and I tell you again '' , Monsieur Favre said rudely . `` Stick to the preaching of the Gospel '' ! ! John stiffened in anger . `` That is the answer the ungodly will always make when the Church points its fingers at their sins . I say to you that the Church will ever decry evil '' ! ! John's reply was like a declaration of war . Monsieur Favre sat down in his high-backed stall , lips compressed , eyes glinting . Ablard Corne , a short man with a rotunda of stomach , rose . Every eye was on him as he began to speak . `` What Master Calvin says is true . How can we have a good city unless we respect morality '' ? ? Abel Poupin , a tall man with sunken cheeks and deep-set eyes , got to his feet . `` We all know that Jake Camaret and the woman are brazenly living together . It would be well to show the populace how we deal with adulterers '' . Philibert Berthelier , the son of the famous patriot , disagreed . `` Do not listen to that Frenchman . He is throttling the liberty my father gave his life to win '' ! ! John was quietly insistent . `` There can be no compromise when souls are in jeopardy '' . A week later the sentence of the Council was carried out : Jake Camaret and the woman were marched naked through the streets past a mocking populace . Before them stalked the beadle , proclaiming as he went , `` Thus the Council deals with those who break its laws -- adulterers , thieves , murderers , and lewd persons . Let evildoers contemplate their ways , and let every man beware '' ! ! John's thoughts raced painfully into the past as he read the letter he had just received from his sister Mary . Charles had died two weeks before , in early November , without being reconciled to the Church . The canons , in a body , had tried to force him on his deathbed to let them give him the last rites of the Church , but he had died still proclaiming salvation by faith . Burial had taken place at night in the ground at the public crossroads under the gibbet , so that his enemies could not find his body and have it dug up and burned . The Abbot of St. Eloi , Claude De Mommor , had been a good friend , but not even he thought Charles deserved burial in hallowed ground . John closed his eyes and saw once again the little niche in his mother's bedroom , where she had knelt to tell the good Virgin of her needs . The blue-draped Virgin was still there , but no one knelt before her now . Not even Varnessa ; ; she , too , prayed only to God . For an instant John longed for the sound of the bells of Noyon-la-Sainte , the touch of his mother's hand , the lilt of Charles's voice in the square raftered rooms , his father's bass tones rumbling to the canons , and the sight of the beloved bishop . But he had to follow the light . Unless God expected a man to believe the Holy Scriptures , why had He given them to him ? ? The white-clad trees stood like specters in the February night . Snow buried the streets and covered the slanting rooftops , as John trudged toward St. Peter's . A carriage crunched by , its dim lights filtering through the gloom . The sharp wind slapped at him and his feet felt like ice as the snow penetrated the holes of his shoes , his only ones , now patched with folded parchment . The city had recently given him a small salary , but it was not enough to supply even necessities . As he neared the square , a round figure muffled in a long , black cape whisked by . John recognized Ablard Corne and called out a greeting . How grateful he was to such men ! ! There were several on the Council who tried to live like Christians . Despite their efforts , the problems seemed to grow graver all the time . Quickening his steps , John entered the vast church and climbed the tower steps to the bells . Underneath the big one , in the silent moonlight , lay a dead pigeon , and on the smaller bell , the Clemence , two gray and white birds slept huddled together in the cold winter air . John leaned upon the stone balustrade . He brushed back his black hair , shoving it under his pastor's cap to keep it from blowing in his eyes . Below the moon-splashed world rolled away to insurmountable white peaks ; ; above him the deep blue sky glittered with stars . He stood very still , his arms at his sides , staring up at the heavens , then down at the blinking lights below . `` How long , my Lord ? ? How long ? ? I have never asked for an easy task , but I am weary of the strife '' . Sleep was difficult these days . Indigestion plagued him . Severe headaches were frequent . Loneliness tore through him like a physical pain whenever he thought of Peter Robert , Nerien , Nicholas Cop , Martin Bucer , and even the compromising Louis Du Tillet . An occasional traveler from Italy brought news of Peter Robert , who was now distributing his Bible among the Waldensian peasants . Letters came regularly from Nerien , Nicholas , and Martin . He had Anthony and William to confide in and consult . But William continued to find a bitter joy in smashing images and tearing down symbols sacred to the Old Church . John found it difficult , but he held him in check . And Anthony was busy most of the time courting this girl and that . His easy good looks made him a favorite with the ladies . Geneva , instead of becoming the City of God , as John had dreamed , had in the two years since he had been there , continued to be a godless place where all manner of vice flourished . Refugees poured in , signing the Confession and rules in order to remain , and then disregarding them . Dice rolled , prostitutes plied their trade , thieves stole , murderers stabbed , and the ungodly blasphemed . Catholics who were truly Christians longed for the simple penance of days gone by . Libertines recalled the heroism of the past and demanded : `` Are we going to allow the Protestant Pope , Master Calvin , to curtail our liberty ? ? Why , oh why , doesn't he stick to preaching the Gospel , instead of meddling in civic affairs , politics , economics , and social issues that are no concern of the Church '' ? ? And John's reply was always the same : `` Anything that affects souls is the concern of the Church ! ! We will have righteousness '' ! ! Tears burned behind his eyes as he prayed and meditated tonight . Unless the confusion cleared , he would not be coming here much longer . Monsieur Favre's threat would become a reality , for he continued to proclaim loudly that the city must rid itself of `` that Frenchman '' . The slow tapping of a cane on the stone steps coming up to the tower interrupted his reverie . Faint at first , the tapping grew until it sounded loud against the wind . Eli Corault ! ! John thought . What is he doing here at this hour ? ? He started down the steps to meet the near-blind preacher , who had been one of the early Gospelers in Paris . `` John ? ? Is that you ? ? I came to warn you of a plot '' ! ! John stood above him , his face ashen . What now ? ? Slowly , like a man grown old , he took Eli's hand and led him below to the tower study , guiding him to a chair beside the little hearth where a fire still burned . `` Plot '' ? ? John asked tiredly . `` Monsieur Favre just paid me a visit . I went to your rooms , and Anthony told me you were here . Two Anabaptists , Caroli and Benoit , are to challenge you and William to a debate before the Council . It is to be a trap . You know the law : if you lose the debate after accepting a challenge , you will be banished '' ! ! `` What will be the subject '' ? ? `` You are to be accused of Arianism to confuse the religious who remain loyal '' . Anger and fear fused in John . Ever since the fourth century a controversy had raged over the person of Christ . Those who refused to believe that He was the eternal Son of God were termed Arianists . Peter Caroli had come to Geneva , saying that he had been a bishop of the Church of Rome and had been persecuted in Paris for his Reformed faith . He asked to be appointed a preacher . But Michael Sept had unmasked him , revealing he had never been a bishop , but was an Anabaptist , afraid to state his faith , because he knew John Calvin had written a book against their belief that the soul slept after death . So John had refused to agree to his appointment as a preacher , and now Caroli sought revenge . John sighed . `` If William agrees , we should insist on a public debate '' , he said at length . `` There is more to the conspiracy . Bern demands that the Lord's Supper be administered here as it used to be , with unleavened bread . Furthermore , Bern decrees that we must do as we are ordered by the Council , preach only the word of God and stop meddling in politics '' ! ! `` It was always the spirit with Christ ; ; matters such as leavened or unleavened bread are inconsequential . Geneva must remain a sovereign state . We will not yield to the demands of Bern '' ! ! The firelight played over Eli's flowing white locks and rugged features . `` Monsieur Favre indicated that if I would co-operate , after you and William are banished , following the debate , I will be given a place of influence '' . `` What was your reply to that '' ? ? `` That I would rather be banished with two such Christians than be made the Chief Syndic '' ! ! The following morning , as John entered the Place Molard on his way to visit a sick refugee , he had a premonition of danger . Then suddenly a group of men and dogs circled him . He wanted to run , but he knew that if he did , he would be lost . He stood very still , his heart thumping wildly . On the outskirts of the rabble the Camaret brothers and Gaspard Favre shook their fists . `` Are you going to comply with the demands of Bern '' ? ? The chinless Jake called . `` Arianist '' ! ! A rowdy with a big blob of a nose roared . `` Heretic '' ! ! John lifted his hand for silence . `` Know this : the ministers will not yield to the demands of Bern '' . His voice shook a little . Somebody heaved a stone . For an instant John was stunned . When he felt the side of his head , his fingers came away covered with blood . Before he could duck , another stone struck him . And another . `` Let him be now '' ! ! Pierre Ameaux , the gaming-card manufacturer said , his little pig eyes glaring . `` We have taught him a lesson '' . The crowd moved back and John started dizzily down the hill . Fists pummeled him as he staggered forward . Then he slipped and went down on his hands and knees in the melting snow . At once a bevy of dogs was snapping and snarling around him . One , more horrible than the rest , lunged , growling deep in his throat , his hair bristling . With great difficulty John clambered to his feet and started to run , sweat pouring down his face . Standing in the shelter of the tent -- a rejected hospital tent on which the rain now dripped , no longer drumming -- Adam watched his own hands touch the objects on the improvised counter of boards laid across two beer barrels . There was , of course , no real need to rearrange everything . A quarter inch this way or that for the hardbake , or the toffee , or the barley sugar , or the sardines , or the bitters , or the condensed milk , or the stationery , or the needles -- what could it mean ? ? Adam watched his own hands make the caressing , anxious movement that , when rain falls and nobody comes , and ruin draws close like a cat rubbing against the ankles , has been the ritual of stall vendors , forever . He recognized the gesture . He knew its meaning . He had seen a dry , old , yellowing hand reach out , with that painful solicitude , to touch , to rearrange , to shift aimlessly , some object worth a pfennig . Back in Bavaria he had seen that gesture , and at that sight his heart had always died within him . On such occasions he had not had the courage to look at the face above the hand , whatever face it might be . Now the face was his own . He wondered what expression , as he made that gesture , was on his face . He wondered if it wore the old anxiety , or the old , taut stoicism . But there was no need , he remembered , for his hand to reach out , for his face to show concern or stoicism . It was nothing to him if rain fell and nobody came . Then why was he assuming the role -- the gesture and the suffering ? ? What was he expiating ? ? Or was he now taking the role -- the gesture and the suffering -- because it was the only way to affirm his history and identity in the torpid , befogged loneliness of this land . This was Virginia . He looked out of the tent at the company street . The rain dripped on the freezing loblolly of the street . Beyond that misty gray of the rain , he saw the stretching hutment , low diminutive log cabins , chinked with mud , with doorways a man would have to crouch to get through , with roofs of tenting laid over boughs or boards from hardtack boxes , or fence rails , with cranky chimneys of sticks and dried mud . The chimney of the hut across from him was surmounted by a beef barrel with ends knocked out . In this heavy air , however , that device did not seem to help . The smoke from that chimney rose as sluggishly as smoke from any other , and hung as sadly in the drizzle , creeping back down along the sopping canvas of the roof . Over the door was a board with large , inept lettering : home sweet home . This was the hut of Simms Purdew , the hero . The men were huddled in those lairs . Adam knew the names of some . He knew the faces of all , hairy or shaven , old or young , fat or thin , suffering or hardened , sad or gay , good or bad . When they stood about his tent , chaffing each other , exchanging their obscenities , cursing command or weather , he had studied their faces . He had had the need to understand what life lurked behind the mask of flesh , behind the oath , the banter , the sadness . Once covertly looking at Simms Purdew , the only man in the world whom he hated , he had seen the heavy , slack , bestubbled jaw open and close to emit the cruel , obscene banter , and had seen the pale-blue eyes go watery with whisky and merriment , and suddenly he was not seeing the face of that vile creature . He was seeing , somehow , the face of a young boy , the boy Simms Purdew must once have been , a boy with sorrel hair , and blue eyes dancing with gaiety , and the boy mouth grinning trustfully among the freckles . In that moment of vision Adam heard the voice within himself saying : I must not hate him , I must not hate him or I shall die . His heart suddenly opened to joy . He thought that if once , only once , he could talk with Simms Purdew , something about his own life , and all life , would be clear and simple . If Simms Purdew would turn to him and say : `` Adam , you know when I was a boy , it was a funny thing happened . Lemme tell you now '' -- If only Simms Purdew could do that , whatever the thing he remembered and told . It would be a sign for the untellable , and he , Adam , would understand . Now , Adam , in the gray light of afternoon , stared across at the hut opposite his tent , and thought of Simms Purdew lying in there in the gloom , snoring on his bunk , with the fumes of whisky choking the air . He saw the sign above the door of the hut : home sweet home . He saw the figure of a man in a poncho coming up the company street , with an armful of wood . It was Pullen James , the campmate of Simms Purdew . He carried the wood , carried the water , did the cooking , cleaning and mending , and occasionally got a kick in the butt for his pains . Adam watched the moisture flow from the poncho . It gave the rubberized fabric a dull gleam , like metal . Pullen James humbly lowered his head , pushed aside the hardtack-box door of the hut , and was gone from sight . Adam stared at the door and remembered that Simms Purdew had been awarded the Medal of Honor for gallantry at Antietam . The street was again empty . The drizzle was slacking off now , but the light was grayer . With enormous interest , Adam watched his hands as they touched and shifted the objects on the board directly before him . Into the emptiness of the street , and his spirit , moved a form . The form was swathed in an army blanket , much patched , fastened at the neck with a cord . From under the shapeless huddle of blanket the feet moved in the mud . The feet wore army shoes , in obvious disrepair . The head was wrapped in a turban and on top of the turban rode a great hamper across which a piece of poncho had been flung . The gray face stared straight ahead in the drizzle . Moisture ran down the cheeks , gathered at the tip of the nose , and at the chin . The figure was close enough now for him to see the nose twitching to dislodge the drop clinging there . The figure stopped and one hand was perilously freed from the hamper to scratch the nose . Then the figure moved on . This was one of the Irish women who had built their own huts down near the river . They did washing . Adam recognized this one . He recognized her because she was the one who , in a winter twilight , on the edge of camp , had once stopped him and reached down her hand to touch his fly . `` Slice o' mutton , bhoy '' ? ? She had queried in her soft guttural . `` Slice o' mutton '' ? ? Her name was Mollie . They called her Mollie the Mutton , and laughed . Looking down the street after her , Adam saw that she had again stopped and again removed one hand from the basket . He could not make out , but he knew that again she was scratching her nose . Mollie the Mutton was scratching her nose . The words ran crazily in his head : Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain . Then the words fell into a pattern : `` Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose , Scratching her nose in the rain . Mollie the Mutton is scratching her nose in the rain '' . The pattern would not stop . It came again and again . He felt trapped in that pattern , in the repetition . Suddenly he thought he might weep . `` What's the matter with me '' ? ? He demanded out loud . He looked wildly around , at the now empty street , at the mud , at the rain . `` Oh , what's the matter with me '' ? ? He demanded . When he had stored his stock in the great oak chest , locked the two big hasps and secured the additional chain , tied the fly of the tent , and picked up the cash box , he moved up the darkening street . He would consign the cash box into the hands of Jed Hawksworth , then stand by while his employer checked the contents and the list of items sold . Then he -- Then what ? ? He did not know . His mind closed on that prospect , as though fog had descended to blot out a valley . Far off , in the dusk , he heard voices singing , muffled but strong . In one of the huts a group of men were huddled together , singing . He stopped . He strained to hear . He heard the words : `` Rock of Ages , cleft for me , Let me hide myself in Thee ! ! Let the water and the blood From Thy riven side flow ! ! '' He thought : I am a Jew from Bavaria . He was standing there , he thought , in Virginia , in the thickening dusk , in a costly greatcoat that had belonged to another Jew . That other Jew , a young man too , had left that greatcoat behind , in a rich house , and marched away . He had crossed the river which now , beyond the woods yonder , was sliding darkly under the mist . He had plunged into the dark woods beyond . He had died there . What had that man , that other young Jew , felt as he stood in the twilight and heard other men , far away , singing together ? ? Adam thought of the hutments , regiment after regiment , row after row , the thousands of huts , stretching away into the night . He thought of the men , the nameless thousands , huddling in them . He thought of Simms Purdew snoring on his bunk while Pullen James crouched by the hearth , skirmishing an undershirt for lice , and a wet log sizzled . He thought of Simms Purdew , who once had risen at the edge of a cornfield , a maniacal scream on his lips , and swung a clubbed musket like a flail to beat down the swirl of Rebel bayonets about him . He thought of Simms Purdew rising up , fearless in glory . He felt the sweetness of pity flood through him , veining his very flesh . Those men , lying in the huts , they did not know . They did not know who they were or know their own worth . In the pity for them his loneliness was gone . Then he thought of Aaron Blaustein standing in his rich house saying : `` God is tired of taking the blame . He is going to let History take the blame for a while '' . He thought of the old man laughing under the glitter of the great chandelier . He thought : Only in my heart can I make the world hang together . Adam rose from the crouch necessary to enter the hut . He saw Mose squatting by the hearth , breaking up hardtack into a pan . A pot was boiling on the coals . `` Gonna give Ole Buckra all his money '' ? ? Mose asked softly . Adam nodded . `` Yeah '' , Mose murmured , `` yeah . And look what he done give us '' . Adam looked at the pot . `` What is it '' ? ? He asked . `` Chicken '' , Mose said , and theatrically licked his lips . `` Gre't big fat chicken , yeah '' . He licked his lips again . Then : `` yeah . A chicken with six tits and a tail lak a corkscrew . And it squealed for slop '' . Mose giggled . `` Fooled you , huh ? ? It is the same ole same , tell me its name . It is sowbelly with tits on . It is salt po'k . It is salt po'k and skippers . That po'k , it was so full of skippers it would jump and run and not come when you say , hoo-pig . Had to put my foot on it to hole it down while I cut it up fer the lob-scuse '' . He dumped the pan of crumbled hardtack into the boiling pot of lobscouse . `` Good ole lob-scuse '' , he mumbled , and stirred the pot . He stopped stirring and looked over his shoulder . `` Know what Ole Buckra et tonight '' ? ? He demanded . `` Know what I had to fix fer Ole Him '' ? ? Adam shook his head . `` Chicken '' , Mose said . She was a child too much a part of her environment , too eager to grow and learn and experience . Once , they were at Easthampton for the summer ( again , Fritzie said , a good place , even though they were being robbed ) . One soft evening -- that marvelous sea-blessed time when the sun's departing warmth lingers and a smell of spume and wrack haunts everything -- Amy had picked herself off the floor and begun to walk . Fritzie was on the couch reading ; ; Laura was sitting in an easy chair about eight feet away . The infant , in white terry-cloth bathrobe , her face intense and purposeful , had essayed a few wobbly steps toward her father . `` Y'all wanna walk -- walk '' , he said . Then , gently , he shoved her behind toward Laura . Amy walked -- making it halfway across the cottage floor . She lost not a second , picking herself up and continuing her pilgrimage to Laura . Then Laura took her gently and shoved her off again , toward Fritzie : Amy did not laugh -- this was work , concentration , achievement . In a few minutes she was making the ten-foot hike unaided ; ; soon she was parading around the house , flaunting her new skill . Some liar's logic , a wisp of optimism as fragile as the scent of tropical blossoms that came through the window ( a euphoria perhaps engendered by the pill Fritzie had given her ) , consoled her for a moment . Amy had to be safe , had to come back to them -- if only to reap that share of life's experiences that were her due , if only to give her parents another chance to do better by her . Through the swathings of terror , she jabbed deceit's sharp point -- Amy would be reborn , a new child , with new parents , living under new circumstances . The comfort was short-lived , yet she found herself returning to the assurance whenever her imagination forced images on her too awful to contemplate without the prop of illusion . Gazing at her husband's drugged body , his chest rising and falling in mindless rhythms , she saw the grandeur of his fictional world , that lush garden from which he plucked flowers and herbs . She envied him . She admired him . In the darkness , she saw him stirring . He seemed to be muttering , his voice surprisingly clear . `` Y'all should have let me take that money out '' , Andrus said . `` 'nother minute I'd have been fine . H'all should have let me do it '' . Laura touched his hand . `` Yes , I know , Fritzie . I should have '' . Tuesday The heat intensified on Tuesday . Southern California gasped and blinked under an autumn hot spell , drier , more enervating , more laden with man's contrived impurities than the worst days of the summer past . It could continue this way , hitting 106 and more in the Valley , Joe McFeeley knew , into October . He and Irvin Moll were sipping coffee at the breakfast bar . Both had been up since 7:00 -- Irv on the early-morning watch , McFeeley unable to sleep during his four-hour relief . The night before , they had telephoned the Andrus maid , Selena Masters , and she had arrived early , bursting her vigorous presence into the silent house with an assurance that amused McFeeley and confounded Moll . The latter , thanking her for the coffee , had winked and muttered , `` Sure 'nuff , honey '' . Selena was the wrong woman for these crudities . With a hard eye , she informed Moll : `` Don't sure 'nuff me , officer . I'm honey only to my husband , understand '' ? ? Sergeant Moll understood . The maid was very black and very energetic , trim in a yellow pique uniform . Her speech was barren of southernisms ; ; she was one of Eliot Sparling's neutralized minorities , adopting the rolling R's and constricted vowels of Los Angeles . Not seeing her dark intelligent face , one would have gauged the voice as that of a Westwood Village matron , ten years out of Iowa . After she had served the detectives coffee and toast ( they politely declined eggs , uncomfortable about their tenancy ) , she settled down with a morning newspaper and began reading the stock market quotations . While she was thus engaged , McFeeley questioned her about her whereabouts the previous day , any recollections she had of people hanging around , of overcurious delivery boys or repairmen , of strange cars cruising the neighborhood . She answered him precisely , missing not a beat in her scrutiny of the financial reports . Selena Masters , Joe realized , was her own woman . She was the only kind of Negro Laura Andrus would want around : independent , unservile , probably charging double what ordinary maids did for housework -- and doubly efficient . When the parents emerged from the bedroom a few minutes later , the maid greeted them quietly . `` I'm awful sorry about what's happened '' , Selena said . `` Maybe today'll be a good-news day '' . She charged off to the bedrooms . Moll took his coffee into the nursery . During the night , a phone company technician had deadened the bells and installed red blinkers on the phones . Someone would have to remain in the office continually . McFeeley greeted the parents , then studied his notebook . He wanted to take the mother to headquarters at once and start her on the mug file . `` Sleep well '' ? ? He asked . Andrus did not answer him . His face was bloated with drugging , redder than normal . The woman had the glassy look of an invalid , as if she had not slept at all . `` Oh -- we managed '' , she said . `` I'm a little groggy . Did anything happen during the night '' ? ? `` Few crank calls '' , McFeeley said . `` A couple of tips we're running down -- nothing promising . We can expect more of the same . Too bad your number is in the directory '' . `` Didn't occur to me my child would be kidnaped when I had it listed '' , Andrus muttered . He settled on the sofa with his coffee , warming his hands on the cup , although the room was heavy with heat . The three had little to say to each other . The previous night's horror -- the absolute failure , overcast with the intrusions of the press , had left them all with a wan sense of uselessness , of play-acting . Sipping their coffee , discussing the weather , the day's shopping , Fritzie's commitments at the network ( all of which he would cancel ) , they avoided the radio , the morning TV news show , even the front page of the Santa Luisa Register , resting on the kitchen bar . Kidnaper spurns ransom ; ; Amy still missing . Once , Andrus walked by it , hastily scanned the bold black headline and the five-column lead of the article ( by Duane Bosch , staff correspondent -- age not given ) , and muttered : `` We a buncha national celebrities '' . McFeeley told the parents he would escort them to police headquarters in a half hour . Before that , he wanted to talk to the neighbors . He did not want to bring the Andruses to the station house too early -- Rheinholdt had summoned a press conference , and he didn't want them subjected to the reporters again . He could think of nothing else to tell them : no assurances , no hopeful hints at great discoveries that day . When the detective left , Andrus phoned his secretary to cancel his work and to advise the network to get a substitute director for his current project . Mrs. Andrus was talking to the maid , arranging for her to come in every day , instead of the four days she now worked . Outside , only a handful of reporters remained . The bulk of the press corps was covering Rheinholdt's conference . In contrast to the caravan of the previous night , there were only four cars parked across the street . Two men he did not recognize were sipping coffee and munching sweet rolls . He did not see Sparling , or DeGroot , or Ringel , or any of the feverish crew that had so harassed him twelve hours ago . However , the litter remained , augmented by several dozen lunchroom suppers . The street cleaner had not yet been around . One of the reporters called to him : `` Anything new , Lieutenant '' ? ? And he ignored him , skirting the parked cars and walking up the path to the Skopas house . When McFeeley was halfway to the door , the proprietor emerged -- a mountainous , dark man , his head thick with resiny black hair , his eyes like two of the black olives he imported in boatloads . McFeeley identified himself . The master of the house , his nourished face unrevealing , consented to postpone his departure a few minutes to talk to the detective . Inside , as soon as Mr. Skopas had disclosed -- in a hoarse whisper -- the detective's errand , his family gathered in a huddle , forming a mass of dark flesh on and around a brocaded sofa which stood at one side of a baroque fireplace . Flanked by marble urns and alabaster lamps , they seemed to be posing for a tribal portrait . It was amazing how they had herded together for protection : an enormous matriarch in a quilted silk wrapper , rising from the breakfast table ; ; a gross boy in his teens , shuffling in from the kitchen with a sandwich in his hands ; ; a girl in her twenties , fat and sullen , descending the marble staircase ; ; then all four gathering on the sofa to face the inquisitor . They answered him in monosyllables , nods , occasionally muttering in Greek to one another , awaiting the word from Papa , who restlessly cracked his knuckles , anxious to stuff himself into his white Cadillac and burst off to the freeway . No , they hadn't seen anyone around ; ; no , they didn't know the Andrus family ; ; yes , they had read about the case ; ; yes , they had let some reporters use their phone , but they would no longer . They offered no opinions , volunteered nothing , betrayed no emotions . Studying them , McFeeley could not help make comparison with the Andrus couple . The Skopas people seemed to him of that breed of human beings whose insularity frees them from tragedy . He imagined they were the kind whose tax returns were never examined ( if they were , they were never penalized ) , whose children had no unhappy romances , whose names never knew scandal . The equation was simple : wealth brought them happiness , and their united front to the world was their warning that they meant to keep everything they had , let no one in on the secrets . By comparison , Fritzie and Laura Andrus were quivering fledglings . They possessed no outer fortifications , no hard shells of confidence ; ; they had enough difficulty getting from day to day , let alone having an awful crime thrust upon them . Skopas expressed no curiosity over the case , offered no expression of sympathy , made no move to escort McFeely to the door . All four remained impacted on the sofa until he had left . He had spoken to Mrs. . Emerson the previous day . There remained a family named Kahler , owners of a two-story Tudor-style house on the south side of the Andrus home . Their names had not come up in any discussions with Laura , and he had no idea what they would be like . McFeeley noted the immaculate lawn and gardens : each blade of grass cropped , bright and firm ; ; each shrub glazed with good health . The door was answered by a slender man in his sixties -- straight-backed , somewhat clerical in manner , wearing rimless glasses . When Joe identified himself , he nodded , unsmiling , and ushered him into a sedate living room . Mrs. Kahler joined them . She had a dried-out quality -- a gray , lean woman , not unattractive . Both were dressed rather formally . The man wore a vest and a tie , the woman had on a dark green dress and three strands of pearls . `` Funny thing '' , Mr. Kahler said , when they were seated , `` when I heard you ringing , I figured it was that guy down the block , Hausman '' . McFeeley looked puzzled . Kahler continued : `` I fixed his dog the other day and I guess he's sore , so I expected him to come barging in '' . Mr. Kahler went on to explain how Hausman's fox terrier had been `` making '' in his flower beds . The dog refused to be scared off , so Kahler had purchased some small firecrackers . He would lay in wait in the garage , and when the terrier came scratching around , he'd let fly with a cherry bomb . `` Scared the hell out of him '' , Kahler grinned . `` I hit him in the ass once '' . Both grinned at the detective . `` Finally , all I needed was to throw a little piece of red wood that looked like a firecracker and that dumb dog would run ki-yi-ing for his life '' . In the dim underwater light they dressed and straightened up the room , and then they went across the hall to the kitchen . She was intimidated by the stove . He found the pilot light and turned on one of the burners for her . The gas flamed up two inches high . They found the teakettle . And put water on to boil and then searched through the icebox . Several sections of a loaf of dark bread ; ; butter ; ; jam ; ; a tiny cake of ice . In their search for what turned out to be the right breakfast china but the wrong table silver , they opened every cupboard door in the kitchen and pantry . While she was settling the teacart , he went back across the hall to their bedroom , opened one of the suitcases , and took out powdered coffee and sugar . She appeared with the teacart and he opened the windows . `` Do you want to call Eugene '' ? ? He didn't , but it was not really a question , and so he left the room , walked down the hall to the front of the apartment , hesitated , and then knocked lightly on the closed door of the study . A sleepy voice answered . `` Le petit dejeuner '' , Harold said , in an accent that did credit to Miss Sloan , his high-school French teacher . At the same time , his voice betrayed uncertainty about their being here , and conveyed an appeal to whatever is reasonable , peace-loving , and dependable in everybody . Since ordinary breakfast-table conversation was impossible , it was at least something that they were able to offer Eugene the sugar bowl with their sugar in it , and the plate of bread and butter , and that Eugene could return the pitcher of hot milk to them handle first . Eugene put a spoonful of powdered coffee into his cup and then filled it with hot water . Stirring , he said : `` I am sorry that my work prevents me from doing anything with you today '' . They assured him that they did not expect or need to be entertained . Harold put a teaspoonful of powdered coffee in his cup and filled it with hot water , and then , stirring , he sat back in his chair . The chair creaked . Every time he moved or said something , the chair creaked again . Eugene was not entirely silent , or openly rude -- unless asking Harold to move to another chair and placing himself in the fauteuil that creaked so alarmingly was an act of rudeness . It went right on creaking under his own considerable weight , and all it needed , Harold thought , was for somebody to fling himself back in a fit of laughter and that would be the end of it . Through the open window they heard sounds below in the street : cartwheels , a tired horse's plodding step , voices . Harold indicated the photograph on the wall and asked what church the stone sculpture was in . Eugene told him and he promptly forgot . They passed the marmalade , the bread , the black-market butter , back and forth . Nothing was said about hotels or train journeys . Eugene offered Harold his car , to use at any time he cared to , and when this offer was not accepted , the armchair creaked . They all three had another cup of coffee . Eugene was in his pajamas and dressing gown , and on his large feet he wore yellow Turkish slippers that turned up at the toes . `` Excuse me '' , he said in Berlitz English , and got up and left them , to bathe and dress . The first shrill ring of the telephone brought Harold out into the hall . He realized that he had no idea where the telephone was . At that moment the bathroom door flew open and Eugene came out , with his face lathered for shaving , and strode down the hall , tying the sash of his dressing gown as he went . The telephone was in the study but the ringing came from the hall . Between the telephone and the wall plug there was sixty feet of cord , and when the conversation came to an end , Eugene carried the instrument with him the whole length of the apartment , to his bathroom , where it rang three more times while he was shaving and in the tub . Before he left the apartment he knocked on their door and asked if there was anything he could do for them . Harold shook his head . `` Sabine called a few minutes ago '' , Eugene said . `` She wants you and Barbara to have dinner with her tomorrow night '' . He handed Harold a key to the front door , and cautioned him against leaving it unlocked while they were out of the apartment . When enough time had elapsed so that there was little likelihood of his returning for something he had forgotten , Harold went out into the hall and stood looking into one room after another . In the room next to theirs was a huge cradle , of mahogany , ornately carved and decorated with gold leaf . It was the most important-looking cradle he had ever seen . Then came their bathroom , and then a bedroom that , judging by the photographs on the walls , must belong to Mme Cestre . A young woman who looked like Alix , with her two children . Alix and Eugene on their wedding day . Matching photographs in oval frames of Mme Bonenfant and an elderly man who must be Alix's grandfather . Mme Vienot , considerably younger and very different . The schoolboy . And a gray-haired man whose glance -- direct , lifelike , and mildly accusing -- was contradicted by the gilt and black frame . It was the kind of frame that is only put around the photograph of a dead person . Professor Cestre , could it be ? ? With the metal shutters closed , the dining room was so dark that it seemed still night in there . One of the drawing-room shutters was partly open and he made out the shapes of chairs and sofas , which seemed to be upholstered in brown or russet velvet . The curtains were of the same material , and there were some big oil paintings -- portraits in the style of Lancret and Boucher . Though , taken individually , the big rooms were , or seemed to be , square , the apartment as a whole formed a triangle . The apex , the study where Eugene slept , was light and bright and airy and cheerful . The window looked out on the Place Redoute -- it was the only window of the apartment that did . Looking around slowly , he saw a marble fireplace , a desk , a low bookcase of mahogany with criss-crossed brass wire instead of glass panes in the doors . The daybed Eugene had slept in , made up now with its dark-brown velours cover and pillows . The portable record player with a pile of classical records beside it . Beethoven's Fifth was the one on top . Da-da-da-dum Music could not be Eugene's passion . Besides , the records were dusty . He tried the doors of the bookcase . Locked . The titles he could read easily through the criss-crossed wires : works on theology , astral physics , history , biology , political science . No poetry . No novels . He moved over to the desk and stood looking at the papers on it but not touching anything . The clock on the mantel piece was scandalized and ticked so loudly that he glanced at it over his shoulder and then quickly left the room . The concierge called out to them as they were passing through the foyer . Her quarters were on the right as you walked into the building , and her small front room was clogged with heavy furniture -- a big , round , oak dining table and chairs , a buffet , with a row of unclaimed letters inserted between the mirror and its frame . The suitcases had come while they were out , and had been put in their room , the concierge said . He waited until they were inside the elevator and then said : `` Now what do we do '' ? ? `` Call the Vouillemont , I guess '' . `` I guess '' . Rather than sit around waiting for the suitcases to be delivered , they had gone sight-seeing . They went to the Flea Market , expecting to find the treasures of Europe , and found instead a duplication of that long double row of booths in Tours . Cheap clothing and junk of every sort , as far as the eye could see . They looked , even so . Looked at everything . Barbara bought some cotton aprons , and Harold bought shoestrings . They had lunch at a sidewalk cafe overlooking the intersection of two broad , busy , unpicturesque streets , and coming home they got lost in the Metro ; ; it took them over an hour to get back to the station where they should have changed , in order to take the line that went to the Place Redoute . It was the end of the afternoon when he took the huge key out of his pocket and inserted it into the keyhole . When he opened the door , there stood Eugene , on his way out of the apartment . He was wearing sneakers and shorts and an open-collared shirt , and in his hand he carried a little black bag . He did not explain where he was going , and they did not ask . Instead , they went on down the hall to their room . `` Do you think he could be having an affair '' ? ? Barbara asked , as they heard the front door close . `` Oh no '' , Harold said , shocked . `` Well , this is France , after all '' . `` I know , but there must be some other explanation . He's probably spending the evening with friends '' . `` And for that he needs a little bag '' ? ? They went shopping in the neighborhood , and bought two loaves of bread with the ration coupons they had been given in Blois , and some cheese , and a dozen eggs , and a bag of oranges from a peddler in the Place Redoute -- the first oranges they had seen since they landed . They had Vermouth , sitting in front of a cafe . When they got home Harold was grateful for the stillness in the apartment , and thought how , under different circumstances , they might have stayed on here , in these old-fashioned , high-ceilinged rooms that reminded him of the Irelands' apartment in the East Eighties . They could have been perfectly happy here for ten whole days . He went down the hall to Eugene's bathroom , to turn on the hot-water heater , and on the side of the tub he saw a pair of blue wool swimming trunks . He felt them . They were damp . He reached out and felt the bath towel hanging on the towel rack over the tub . Damp also . He looked around the room and then called out : `` Come here , quick '' ? ? `` What is it '' ? ? Barbara asked , standing in the doorway . `` I've solved the mystery of the little bag . There it is and there is what was in it . But where do people go swimming in Paris ? ? That boat in the river , maybe '' . `` What boat '' ? ? `` There's a big boat anchored near the Place De La Concorde , with a swimming pool in it -- didn't you notice it ? ? But if he has time to go swimming , he had time to be with us '' . She looked at him in surprise . `` I know '' , he said , reading her mind . `` I don't know what I'm going to do with you '' . `` It's because we are in France '' , he said , `` and know so few people . So something like this matters more than it would at home . Also , he was so nice when he was nice '' . `` All because I didn't feel like dancing '' . `` I don't think it was that , really '' . `` Then what was it '' ? ? `` I don't know . I wish I did . The tweed coat , maybe . The thing about Eugene is that he's very proud '' . And the thing about hurt feelings , the wet bathing suit pointed out , is that the person who has them is not quite the innocent party he believes himself to be . For instance -- what about all those people Harold Rhodes went toward unhesitatingly , as if this were the one moment they would ever have together , their one chance of knowing each other ? ? Fortunately , the embarrassing questions raised by objects do not need to be answered , or we would all have to go sleep in the open fields . And in any case , answers may clarify but they do not change anything . He brought with him a mixture of myrrh and aloes , of about a hundred pounds' weight . They took Jesus's body , then , and wrapped it in winding-clothes with the spices ; ; that is how the Jews prepare a body for burial . Listed as present at the Descent were Mary , Mary's sister , Mary Magdalene , John , Joseph of Arimathea , Nicodemus . Search as he might , he could find no place where the Bible spoke of a moment when Mary could have been alone with Jesus . Mostly the scene was crowded with mourners , such as the dramatic Dell'Arca Lamentation in Bologna , where the grief-stricken spectators had usurped Mary's last poignant moment . In his concept there could be no one else present . His first desire was to create a mother and son alone in the universe . When might Mary have had that moment to hold her child on her lap ? ? Perhaps after the soldiers had laid him on the ground , while Joseph of Arimathea was at Pontius Pilate's asking for Christ's body , Nicodemus was gathering his mixture of myrrh and aloes , and the others had gone home to mourn . Those who saw his finished Pieta would take the place of the biblical witnesses . They would feel what Mary was undergoing . There would be no halos , no angels . These would be two human beings , whom God had chosen . He felt close to Mary , having spent so long concentrating on the beginning of her journey . Now she was intensely alive , anguished ; ; her son was dead . Even though he would later be resurrected , he was at this moment dead indeed , the expression on his face reflecting what he had gone through on the cross . In his sculpture therefore it would not be possible for him to project anything of what Jesus felt for his mother ; ; only what Mary felt for her son . Jesus' inert body would be passive , his eyes closed . Mary would have to carry the human communication . This seemed right to him . It was a relief to shift in his mind to technical problems . Since his Christ was to be life size , how was Mary to hold him on her lap without the relationship seeming ungainly ? ? His Mary would be slender of limb and delicate of proportion , yet she must hold this full-grown man as securely and convincingly as she would a child . There was only one way to accomplish this : by design , by drawing diagrams and sketches in which he probed the remotest corner of his mind for creative ideas to carry his concept . He started by making free sketches to loosen up his thinking so that images would appear on paper . Visually , these approximated what he was feeling within himself . At the same time he started walking the streets , peering at the people passing or shopping at the stalls , storing up fresh impressions of what they looked like , how they moved . In particular he sought the gentle , sweet-faced nuns , with head coverings and veils coming to the middle of their foreheads , remembering their expressions until he reached home and set them down on paper . Discovering that draperies could be designed to serve structural purposes , he began a study of the anatomy of folds . He improvised as he went along , completing a life-size clay figure , then bought yards of an inexpensive material from a draper , wet the lightweight cloth in a basin and covered it over with clay that Argiento brought from the bank of the Tiber , to the consistency of thick mud . No fold could be accidental , each turn of the drapery had to serve organically , to cover the Madonna's slender legs and feet so that they would give substantive support to Christ's body , to intensify her inner turmoil . When the cloth dried and stiffened , he saw what adjustments had to be made . `` So that's sculpture '' , commented Argiento wryly , when he had sluiced down the floor for a week , `` making mud pies '' . Michelangelo grinned . `` See , Argiento , if you control the way these folds are bunched , like this , or made to flow , you can enrich the body attitudes . They can have as much tactile appeal as flesh and bone '' . He went into the Jewish quarter , wanting to draw Hebraic faces so that he could reach a visual understanding of how Christ might have looked . The Jewish section was in Trastevere , near the Tiber at the church of San Francesco a Ripa . The colony had been small until the Spanish Inquisition of 1492 drove many Jews into Rome . Here , for the most part , they were well treated , as a `` reminder of the Old Testament heritage of Christianity '' ; ; many of their gifted members were prominent in the Vatican as physicians , musicians , bankers . The men did not object to his sketching them while they went about their work , but no one could be persuaded to come to his studio to pose . He was told to ask for Rabbi Melzi at the synagogue on Saturday afternoon . Michelangelo found the rabbi in the room of study , a gentle old man with a white beard and luminous grey eyes , robed in black gabardine with a skullcap on his head . He was reading from the Talmud with a group of men from his congregation . When Michelangelo explained why he had come , Rabbi Melzi replied gravely : `` The Bible forbids us to bow down to or to make graven images . That is why our creative people give their time to literature , not to painting or sculpture '' . `` But , Rabbi Melzi , you don't object to others creating works of art '' ? ? `` Not at all . Each religion has its own tenets '' . `` I am carving a Pieta from white Carrara marble . I wish to make Jesus an authentic Jew . I cannot accomplish this if you will not help me '' . The rabbi said thoughtfully , `` I would not want my people to get in trouble with the Church '' . `` I am working for the Cardinal of San Dionigi . I'm sure he would approve '' . `` What kind of models would you prefer '' ? ? `` Workmen . In their mid-thirties . Not bulky laborers , but sinewy men . With intelligence . And sensitivity '' . Rabbi Melzi smiled at him with infinitely old but merry eyes . `` Leave me your address . I will send you the best the quarter has to offer '' . Michelangelo hurried to Sangallo's solitary bachelor room with his sketches , asked the architect to design a stand which would simulate the seated Madonna . Sangallo studied the drawings and improvised a trestle couch . Michelangelo bought some scrap lumber . Together he and Argiento built the stand , covering it with blankets . His first model arrived at dusk . He hesitated for a moment when Michelangelo asked him to disrobe , so Michelangelo gave him a piece of toweling to wrap around his loins , led him to the kitchen to take off his clothes . He then draped him over the rough stand , explained that he was supposed to be recently dead , and was being held on his mother's lap . The model quite plainly thought Michelangelo crazy ; ; only the instructions from his rabbi kept him from bolting . But at the end of the sitting , when Michelangelo showed him the quick , free drawings , with the mother roughed in , holding her son , the model grasped what Michelangelo was after , and promised to speak to his friends . He worked for two hours a day with each model sent by the rabbi . Mary presented quite a different problem . Though this sculpture must take place thirty-three years after her moment of decision , he could not conceive of her as a woman in her mid-fifties , old , wrinkled , broken in body and face by labor or worry . His image of the Virgin had always been that of a young woman , even as had his memory of his mother . Jacopo Galli introduced him into several Roman homes . Here he sketched , sitting in their flowing gowns of linen and silk , young girls not yet twenty , some about to be married , some married a year or two . Since the Santo Spirito hospital had taken only men , he had had no experience in the study of female anatomy ; ; but he had sketched the women of Tuscany in their fields and homes . He was able to discern the body lines of the Roman women under their robes . He spent concentrated weeks putting his two figures together : a Mary who would be young and sensitive , yet strong enough to hold her son on her lap ; ; and a Jesus who , though lean , was strong even in death a look he remembered well from his experience in the dead room of Santo Spirito . He drew toward the composite design from his meticulously accurate memory , without need to consult his sketches . Soon he was ready to go into a three-dimensional figure in clay . Here he would have free expression because the material could be moved to distort forms . When he wanted to emphasize , or get greater intensity , he added or subtracted clay . Next he turned to wax because there was a similarity of wax to marble in tactile quality and translucence . He respected each of these approach techniques , and kept them in character : his quill drawings had a scratchiness , suggesting skin texture ; ; the clay he used plastically to suggest soft moving flesh , as in an abdomen , in a reclining torso ; ; the wax he smoothed over to give the body surface an elastic pull . Yet he never allowed these models to become fixed in his mind ; ; they remained rough starting points . When carving he was charged with spontaneous energy ; ; too careful or detailed studies in clay and wax would have glued him down to a mere enlarging of his model . The true surge had to be inside the marble itself . Drawing and models were his thinking . Carving was action . 10 . The arrangement with Argiento was working well , except that sometimes Michelangelo could not figure who was master and who apprentice . Argiento had been trained so rigorously by the Jesuits that Michelangelo was unable to change his habits : up before dawn to scrub the floors , whether they were dirty or not ; ; water boiling on the fire for washing laundry every day , the pots scoured with river sand after each meal . `` Argiento , this is senseless '' , he complained , not liking to work on the wet floors , particularly in cold weather . `` You're too clean . Scrub the studio once a week . That's enough '' . `` No '' , said Argiento stolidly . `` Every day . Before dawn . I was taught '' . `` And God help anyone who tries to unteach you '' ! ! Grumbled Michelangelo ; ; yet he knew that he had nothing to grumble about , for Argiento made few demands on him . The boy was becoming acquainted with the contadini families that brought produce into Rome . On Sundays he would walk miles into the campagna to visit with them , and in particular to see their horses . The one thing he missed from his farm in the Po Valley was the animals ; ; frequently he would take his leave of Michelangelo by announcing : `` Today I go see the horses '' . It took a piece of bad luck to show Michelangelo that the boy was devoted to him . He was crouched over his anvil in the courtyard getting his chisels into trim , when a splinter of steel flew into his eye and imbedded itself in his pupil . He stumbled into the house , eyes burning like fire . Argiento made him lie down on the bed , brought a pan of hot water , dipped some clean white linen cloth and applied it to extract the splinter . Though the pain was considerable Michelangelo was not too concerned . He assumed he could blink the splinter out . But it would not come . Argiento never left his side , keeping the water boiled , applying hot compresses throughout the night . By the second day Michelangelo began to worry ; ; and by the second night he was in a state of panic : he could see nothing out of the afflicted eye . At dawn Argiento went to Jacopo Galli . Galli arrived with his family surgeon , Maestro Lippi . The surgeon carried a cage of live pigeons . He told Argiento to take a bird out of the cage , cut a large vein under its wing , let the blood gush into Michelangelo's injured eye . The surgeon came back at dusk , cut the vein of a second pigeon , again washed out the eye . Beth was very still and her breath came in small jerking gasps . The thin legs twitched convulsively once , then Kate felt the little body stiffening in her arms and heard one strangled sound . The scant flesh grew cool beneath her frantic hands . The child was gone . When Juanita awoke , Kate was still rocking the dead child , still crooning in disbelief , `` No , no , oh , no ! ! '' They put Kate to bed and wired Jonathan and sent for the young Presbyterian minister . He sat beside Kate's bed with the others throughout the morning , talking , talking of God's will , while Kate lay staring angrily at him . When he told her God had called the child to Him , she rejected his words rebelliously . Few of the neighbors came , but Mrs. Tussle came , called by tragedy . `` It always comes in threes '' , she sighed heavily . `` Trouble never comes but in threes '' . They held the funeral the next morning from the crossroads church and buried the little box in the quiet family plot . Kate moved through all the preparations and services in a state of bewilderment . She would not accept the death of such a little child . `` God called her to Him '' , the minister had said . God would not do that , Kate thought stubbornly . Jonathan's letter came , as she knew it would , and he had accepted their child's death as another judgment from God against both Kate and himself . In blind panic of grief she accepted Jonathan's dictum , and believed in her desperation that she had been cursed by God . She held Jonathan's letter , his words burning like a brand , and knew suddenly that the bonds between them were severed . She had nothing left but her duty to his land and his son . Joel came and sat mutely with her , sharing her pain and anguish , averting his eyes from the ice packs on her bosom . Juanita and Mrs. Tussle kept Kate in bed a week until her milk dried . When she returned to life in the big house she felt shriveled of all emotion save dedication to duty . She disciplined herself daily to do what must be done . She had even steeled herself to keep Juanita upstairs in the nurse's room off the empty nursery , although the girl tried to insist on moving back to the quarters to spare Kate remembrance of the baby's death . Juanita drooped about the place , wearing a haunted , brooding look , which Kate attributed to the baby's death , until the day a letter came for her addressed to `` Miss Juanita Fitzroy '' , bearing a Grafton postmark . Seeing the slanting hand , Kate knew uneasily that it was from the Yankee colonel . The Federal forces had taken Parkersburg and Grafton from the Rebels and were moving to take all the mountains . Kate tried to contain her curiosity and foreboding at what the letter portended , at what involvement existed for Juanita . Uncle Randolph and Joel had replanted the bottom lands with difficulty , for more of the slaves , including Annie , had sneaked off when the soldiers broke camp . Joel worked like a field hand in the afternoons after school . He had been at lessons in the schoolhouse since they returned from Harpers Ferry . Kate felt she had deserted the boy in her own loss . She loved him and missed his company . Uncle Randolph had been riding out every evening on some secret business of his own . What it was Kate could not fathom . He claimed to be visiting the waterfront saloon at the crossroads to play cards and drink with his cronies , but Kate had not smelled brandy on him since Mrs. Lattimer's funeral . Joel knew what he was about , however . `` You're gonna get caught '' , she heard Joel say to Uncle Randolph by the pump one morning . `` Not this old fox '' , chuckled Uncle Randolph . `` Everybody knows I'm just a harmless , deaf old man who takes to drink . I aim to keep a little whisky still back in the ridge for my pleasure '' . `` Whiskey still , my foot '' , said Joel . `` You're back there riding with the guerrillas , the Moccasin Rangers '' . `` Hush '' , said Uncle Randolph , smiling , `` or I'll give you another black eye '' . He patted the eye Joel had had blackened in a fight over being Rebel at the crossroads some days back . Kate had no idea what they were talking of , although she had seen the blue lights and strange fires burning and winking on the ridges at night , had heard horsemen on the River Road and hill trails through the nights till dawn . Stranger , Uncle Randolph began riding home nights with a jug strapped to his saddle , drunkenly singing `` Old Dan Tucker '' at the top of his voice . Hearing his voice ring raucously up from the road , Kate would await him anxiously and watch perplexed as he walked into the house , cold sober . What he was about became clear to her with the circulation of another broadside proclamation by General McClellan , threatening reprisals against Rebel guerrillas . She was taken up in worry for the reckless old man . Kate drew more and more on her affection for Joel through the hot days of summer work . She had taken him out of the schoolhouse and closed the school for the summer , after she saw Miss Snow crack Joel across the face with a ruler for letting a snake loose in the schoolroom . Kate had walked past the school on her morning chores and had seen the whole incident , had seen Joel's burning humiliation before Miss Snow's cold , bespectacled wrath . He had the hardest pains of growing before him now , as he approached twelve . These would be his hardest years , she knew , and he missed his father desperately . She tried to find some way to draw him out , to help him . Whenever she found time , she went blackberry picking with him , and they would come home together , mouths purple , arms and faces scratched , tired enough to forget grief for another day . He tended the new colts Beau had sired . He helped Kate and Juanita enlarge the flower garden in the side yard , where they sometimes sat in the still evenings watching the last fat bees working against the summer's purple dusk . No one went much to the crossroads now except Uncle Randolph . They stayed in their own world on the bluff , waiting for letters and the peddler , bringing the news . Jonathan wrote grimly of the destruction of Harpers Ferry before they abandoned it ; ; of their first engagement at Falling Waters after Old Jack's First Brigade had destroyed all the rolling stock of the B & O Railroad . The men were restive , he wrote , ready to take the battle to the enemy as Jackson wished . The peddler came bawling his wares and told them of the convention in Wheeling , Which had formed a new state government by declaring the government at Richmond in the east illegal because they were traitors . Dangling his gaudy trinkets before them , he told of the Rebel losses in the mountains , at Cheat and Rich mountains both , and the Federal march on Beverly . `` Cleaned all them Rebs out'n the hills , they did ! ! They won't never git over inter loyal western Virginia , them traitors ! ! The Federals is making everybody take the oath of loyalty around these parts too '' , he crowed . After he had gone , Kate asked Uncle Randolph proudly , `` Would you take their oath '' ? ? And the old man had given a sly and wicked laugh and said , `` Hell , yes ! ! I think I've taken it about fifty times already '' ! ! Winking at Joel's look of shock . Her mother wrote Kate of her grief at the death of Kate's baby and at Jonathan's decision to go with the South `` And , dear Kate '' , she wrote , `` poor Dr. Breckenridge's son Robert is now organizing a militia company to go South , to his good father's sorrow . Maj. Anderson of Fort Sumter is home and recruiting volunteers for the U.S. Army . In spite of the fact that the state legislature voted us neutral , John Hunt Morgan is openly flying the Confederate flag over his woolen factory '' ! ! Rumor of a big battle spread like a grassfire up the valley . Accounts were garbled at the telegraph office when they sent old George down to Parkersburg for the news . `` All dey know down dere is it were at Manassas Junction and it were a big fight '' , the old man told them . In the next few days they had cause to rejoice . It had been a big battle , and the Confederate forces had won . Jonathan and Ben were not on the lists of the dead or on that of the missing . Kate and Mrs. Tussle waited for letters anxiously . Joel went to the crest of a hill behind the house and lit an enormous victory bonfire to celebrate . When Kate hurried in alarm to tell him to put it out , she saw other dots of flames among the western Virginia hills from the few scattered fires of the faithful . They all prayed now that the North would realize that peace must come , for Virginia had defended her land victoriously . The week after Manassas the sound of horses in the yard brought Kate up in shock from an afternoon's rest when she saw the Federal soldiers from her upstairs window . They had already lost most of their corn , she thought . Were they to be insulted again because of the South's great victory ? ? She remembered McClellan's last proclamation as she hurried fearfully down the stairs . At the landing she saw Juanita , her face flushed pink with excitement , run down the hall from the kitchen to the front door . Juanita stopped just inside the open door , her hand to her mouth . As Kate came swiftly down the stairs to the hall she saw Colonel Marsh framed in the doorway , his face set in the same vulnerable look Juanita wore . Kate greeted him gravely , uneasy with misgivings at his visit . `` What brings you here again , Colonel Marsh '' ? ? She asked , taking him and Juanita into the parlor where the shutters were closed against the afternoon sun . `` I stopped to say goodbye , Mrs. Lattimer , and to tell you how sorry I was to hear about your baby . I wish our doctor could have saved her '' . `` It was a terrible loss to me '' , said Kate quietly , feeling the pain twist again at the mention , knowing now that Juanita must have written to him at Grafton . `` Where will you go now that you're leaving Parkersburg '' ? ? She asked him , seeing Juanita's eyes grow bleak . `` As you know , General McClellan has been occupying Beverly . He has notified me that he has orders to go to Washington to take over the Army of the Potomac . I am to go to Washington to serve with him '' . `` When are you to leave '' ? ? Kate asked , watching them both now anxiously . Their eyes betrayed too much of their emotions , she thought sadly . `` Tomorrow . Would you permit Juanita to walk about the grounds with me for a short spell , Mrs. Lattimer '' ? ? `` Stay here in the parlor where it's cool '' , she said , trying to be calm . It would be better for Joel and Uncle Randolph and Mrs. Tussle not to see them . Kate went back and reminded the kitchen women of the supper preparations . Then she took iced lemonade to Marsh's young aide where he sat in the cool of the big trees around the flower garden . When Marsh called to his aide and the pair rode off down the River Road where the gentians burned blue , Juanita was shaken and trying not to cry . She sought Kate out upstairs , her lips trembling . `` He wants me to go with him tomorrow '' , she told Kate . `` What do you want to do '' ? ? Kate asked , uneasy at the gravity of the girl's dilemma . `` I could go with him . He knows me as your niece , which , of course , I am . But I am a slave ! ! You own me . It's your decision '' , said Juanita , holding her face very still , trying to contain the bitterness of her voice as she enunciated her words too distinctly . `` No , the decision is yours . I have held your papers of manumission since I married Mr. Lattimer '' . The red glow from the cove had died out of the sky . The two in the bed knew each other as old people know the partners with whom they have shared the same bed for many years , and they needed to say no more . The things left unsaid they both felt deeply , and with a sigh they fell back on the well-stuffed pillows . Anita put out the remaining candles with a long snuffer , and in the smell of scented candlewick , the comforting awareness of each other's bodies , the retained pattern of dancers and guests remembered , their minds grew numb and then empty of images . They slept -- Mynheer with a marvelously high-pitched snoring , the damn seahorse ivory teeth watching him from a bedside table . In the ballroom below , the dark had given way to moonlight coming in through the bank of French windows . It was a delayed moon , but now the sky had cleared of scudding black and the stars sugared the silver-gray sky . Martha Schuyler , old , slow , careful of foot , came down the great staircase , dressed in her best lace-drawn black silk , her jeweled shoe buckles held forward . `` Well , I'm here at last '' , she said , addressing the old portraits on the walls . `` I don't hear the music . I am getting deaf , I must admit it '' . She came to the ballroom and stood on the two carpeted steps that led down to it . `` Where is everyone ? ? I say , where is everyone ? ? Peter , you lummox , you've forgot to order the musicians '' . She stood there , a large old woman , smiling at the things she would say to him in the morning , this big foolish baby of a son . There were times now , like this , when she lost control of the time count and moved freely back and forth into three generations . Was it a birthday ball ? ? When Peter had reached his majority at eighteen ? ? Or was it her own first ball as mistress of this big house , a Van Rensselaer bride from way upstate near Albany , from Rensselaerwyck . And this handsome booby , staring and sweating , was he her bridegroom ? ? Martha picked up the hem of her gown and with eyes closed she slowly began to dance a stately minuet around the ballroom . David Cortlandt was tired beyond almost the limits of his flesh . He had ridden hard from Boston , and he was not used to horseback . Now , driving the horse and sulky borrowed from Mynheer Schuyler , he felt as if every bone was topped by burning oil and that every muscle was ready to dissolve into jelly and leave his big body helpless and unable to move . The road leading south along the river was shaded with old trees , and in the moonlight the silvery landscape was like a setting for trolls and wood gods rather than the Hudson River Valley of his boyhood memories . He slapped the reins on the back of the powerful gray horse and held on as the sulky's wheels hit a pothole and came out with a jolt and went on . He would cross to Manhattan , to Harlem Heights , before morning . There a certain farmhouse was a station for the Sons of Liberty . He would send on by trusted messenger the dispatches with their electrifying news . And he would sleep , sleep , and never think of roads and horses' sore haunches , of colonial wars . Strange how everything here fitted back into his life , even if he had been away so long . Mynheer , Sir Francis , the valley society , the very smell of the river on his right purling along to the bay past fish weirs and rocks , and ahead the sleepy ribbon of moon-drenched road . A mist was walking on the water , white as cotton , but with a blending and merging grace . Ahead there was a stirring of sudden movement at a crossroads . David reached for the pair of pistols in the saddlebags at his feet . He pulled out one of them and cocked it . A strange wood creature came floating up from a patch of berry bushes . It was a grotesque hen , five or six feet tall . It had the features of a man bewhiskered by clumps of loose feathers . It ran , this apocalyptic beast , on two thin legs , and its wings -- were they feathered arms ? ? -- flapped as it ran . Its groin was bloody . Black strips of skin hung from it . The horse shied at the dreadful thing and flared its nostrils . David took a firm hand with it . The creature in feathers looked around and David saw the mad eyes , glazed with an insane fear . The ungainly bird thing ran away , and to David its croaking sounded like the crowing of a tormented rooster . Then it was gone . He drove on , wary and shaken . The Sons were out tonight . Chapter 10 New York lay bleaching in the summer sun , and the morning fish hawk , flying in the heated air , saw below him the long triangular wedge of Manhattan Island . It was thickly settled by fifteen thousand citizens and laid out into pig-infested streets , mostly around the Battery , going bravely north to Wall Street , but giving up and becoming fields and farms in the region of Harlem Heights . From there it looked across at Westchester County and the Hudson River where the manor houses , estates , and big farms of the original ( non-Indian ) landowners began . On the east side of the island of Manhattan the indifferent hawk knew the East River that connected New York Bay with Long Island Sound . On the western tip of Long Island protruded Brooklyn Heights . It commanded a view over Manhattan and the harbor . A fringe of housing and gardens bearded the top of the heights , and behind it were sandy roads leading past farms and hayfields . Husbandry was bounded by snake-rail fences , and there were grazing cattle . On the shores north and south , the fishers and mooncursers -- smugglers -- lived along the churning Great South Bay and the narrow barrier of sand , Fire Island . The morning hawk , hungry for any eatable , killable , digestible item , kept his eyes on the ring of anchored ships that lay off the shores in the bay , sheltered by the Jersey inlets . They often threw tidbits overboard . The larger ships were near Paulus Hook , already being called , by a few , Jersey City . These were the ships of His Majesty's Navy , herding the hulks of the East Indies merchants and the yachts and ketches of the loyalists . The news of battle on Breed's Hill had already seeped through , and New York itself was now left in the hands of the local Provincial Congress . The fish hawk , his wings not moving , circled and glided lower . The gilt sterns of the men-of-war becoming clearer to him , the sides of the wooden sea walls alternately painted yellow and black , the bronze cannon at the ports . The captain's gig of H.M.S. Mercury was being rowed to H.M.S. Neptune . On shore `` the freed slaves to despotism '' -- the town dwellers -- watched the ships and waited . The chevaux de frise , those sharp stakes and barriers around the fort at the Battery , pointed to a conflict between the town and sea power rolling in glassy swells as the tide came in . Across the bay the Palisades were heavy in green timber ; ; their rock paths led down to the Hudson . Below in the open bay facing Manhattan was Staten Island , gritty with clam shells and mud flats behind which nested farms , cattle barns , and berry thickets . Along Wappinger Creek in Dutchess County , past the white church at Fishkill , past Verplanck's Point on the east bank of the Hudson , to the white salt-crusted roads of the Long Island Rockaways there was a watching and an activity of preparing for something explosive to happen . Today , tomorrow , six months , even perhaps a year The fish hawk flew on and was lost from sight . The British ships rolled at anchor , sent out picket boats and waited for orders from London . Waited for more ships , more lobster-backed infantry , and asked what was to be done with a war of rebellion ? ? David Cortlandt , having slept away a day and a night , came awake in a plank farmhouse on the Harlem River near Spuyten Duyvil . He looked out through windowpanes turned a faint violet by sun and weather , looked out at King's Bridge toward Westchester . The road seemed animated with a few more wagons than usual ; ; a carriage raising up the choking June dust , and beyond , in a meadow , a local militia company drilling with muskets , Kentuck' rifles , every kind of horse pistol , old sword , or cutlass . The wraith-like events of the last few days flooded David's mind and he rubbed his unshaved chin and felt again the ache in his kidneys caused by his saddle odyssey from Boston . Pensive , introspective , he ached . He had sent the dispatches downtown to the proper people and had slept . Now there was more to do . Orders not written down had to be transmitted to the local provincial government . He scratched his mosquito-plagued neck . From the saddlebags , hung on a Hitchcock chair , David took out a good English razor , a present from John Hunter . He found tepid water in a pitcher and a last bit of soap , and he lathered his face and stood stropping the razor on his broad leather belt , its buckle held firm by a knob of the bedpost . He hoped he was free of self-deception . Here he was , suddenly caught up in the delirium of a war , in the spite and calumny of Whigs and Tories . There would be great need soon for his skill as surgeon , but somehow he had not planned to use his knowledge merely for war . David Cortlandt had certain psychic intuitions that this rebellion was not wholly what it appeared on the surface . He knew that many were using it for their own ends . But it did not matter . He stropped the razor slowly ; ; what mattered was that a new concept of Americans was being born . That some men did not want it he could understand . The moral aridity of merchants made them loyal usually to their ledgers . Yet some , like Morris Manderscheid , would bankrupt themselves for the new ideas . Unique circumstances would test us all , he decided . Injury and ingratitude would occur . No doubt John Hancock would do well now ; ; war was a smugglers' heaven . And what of that poor tarred and feathered wretch he had seen on the road driving down from Schuyler's ? ? Things like that would increase rather than be done away with . One had to believe in final events or one was stranded in the abyss of nothing . He saw with John Hunter now that the perfectability of man was a dream . Life was a short play of tenebrous shadows . David began to shave with great sweeping strokes . Time plays an essential part in our mortality , and suddenly for no reason he could imagine ( or admit ) the image of Peg laughing filled his mind -- so desirable , so lusty , so full of nuances of pleasure and joy . He drove sensual patterns off , carefully shaving his long upper lip . It is harder , he muttered , to meditate on man ( or woman ) than on God . David finished shaving , washed his face clean of lather , and combed and retied his hair . He was proud that he had never worn a wig . More and more of the colonials were wearing their own hair and not using powder . He felt cheerful again , refreshed ; ; presentable in his wide-cut brown suit , the well-made riding boots . It is so easy to falsify sentiment . In the meadow below , militia officers shouted at their men and on King's Bridge two boys sat fishing . The future would happen ; ; he did not have to hurry it by thinking too much . A man could be tossed outside the dimension of time by a stray bullet these days . He began to pack the saddlebags . And all this too shall pass away : it came to him out of some dim corner of memory from a church service when he was a boy -- yes , in a white church with a thin spur steeple in the patriarchal Hudson Valley , where a feeling of plenitude was normal in those English-Dutch manors with their well-fed squires . Burly leathered men and wrinkled women in drab black rags carried on in a primitive way , almost unchanged from feudal times . Peasants puzzled Andrei . He wondered how they could go on in poverty , superstition , ignorance , with a complete lack of desire to make either their land or their lives flourish . Andrei remembered a Bathyran meeting long ago . Tolek Alterman had returned from the colonies in Palestine and , before the national leadership , exalted the miracles of drying up swamps and irrigating the desert . A fund-raising drive to buy tractors and machinery was launched . Andrei remembered that his own reaction had been one of indifference . Had he found the meaning too late ? ? It aggravated him . The land of the Lublin Uplands was rich , but no one seemed to care . In the unfertile land in Palestine humans broke their backs pushing will power to the brink . He had sat beside Alexander Brandel at the rostrum of a congress of Zionists . All of them were there in this loosely knit association of diversified ideologies , and each berated the other and beat his breast for his own approaches . When Alexander Brandel rose to speak , the hall became silent . `` I do not care if your beliefs take you along a path of religion or a path of labor or a path of activism . We are here because all our paths travel a blind course through a thick forest , seeking human dignity . Beyond the forest all our paths merge into a single great highway which ends in the barren , eroded hills of Judea . This is our singular goal . How we travel through the forest is for each man's conscience . Where we end our journey is always the same . We all seek the same thing through different ways -- an end to this long night of two thousand years of darkness and unspeakable abuses which will continue to plague us until the Star of David flies over Zion '' . This was how Alexander Brandel expressed pure Zionism . It had sounded good to Andrei , but he did not believe it . In his heart he had no desire to go to Palestine . He loathed the idea of drying up swamps or the chills of malaria or of leaving his natural birthright . Before he went into battle Andrei had told Alex , `` I only want to be a Pole . Warsaw is my city , not Tel Aviv '' . And now Andrei sat on a train on the way to Lublin and wondered if he was not being punished for his lack of belief . Warsaw ! ! He saw the smug eyes of the Home Army chief , Roman , and all the Romans and the faces of the peasants who held only hatred for him . They had let this black hole of death in Warsaw's heart exist without a cry of protest . Once there had been big glittering rooms where Ulanys bowed and kissed the ladies' hands as they flirted from behind their fans . Warsaw ! ! Warsaw ! ! `` Miss Rak . I am a Jew '' . Day by day , week by week , month by month , the betrayal gnawed at Andrei's heart . He ground his teeth together . I hate Warsaw , he said to himself . I hate Poland and all the goddamned mothers' sons of them . All of Poland is a coffin . The terrible vision of the ghetto streets flooded his mind . What matters now ? ? What is beyond this fog ? ? Only Palestine , and I will never live to see Palestine because I did not believe . By late afternoon the train inched into the marshaling yards in the railhead at Lublin , which was filled with lines of cars poised to pour the tools of war to the Russian front . At a siding , another train which was a familiar sight these days . Deportees . Jews . Andrei's skilled eye sized them up . They were not Poles . He guessed by their appearance that they were Rumanians . He walked toward the center of the city to keep his rendezvous with Styka . Of all the places in Poland , Andrei hated Lublin the most . The Bathyrans were all gone . Few of the native Jews who had lived in Lublin were still in the ghetto . From the moment of the occupation Lublin became a focal point . He and Ana watched it carefully . Lublin generally was the forerunner of what would happen elsewhere . Early in 1939 , Odilo Globocnik , the Gauleiter of Vienna , established SS headquarters for all of Poland . The Bathyrans ran a check on Globocnik and had only to conclude that he was in a tug of war with Hans Frank and the civilian administrators . Globocnik built the Death's-Head Corps . Lublin was the seed of action for the `` final solution '' of the Jewish problem . As the messages from Himmler , Heydrich , and Eichmann came in through Alfred Funk , Lublin's fountainhead spouted . A bevy of interlacing lagers , work camps , concentration camps erupted in the area . Sixty thousand Jewish prisoners of war disappeared into Lublin's web . Plans went in and out of Lublin , indicating German confusion . A tale of a massive reservation in the Uplands to hold several million Jews A tale of a plan to ship all Jews to the island of Madagascar Stories of the depravity of the guards at Globocnik's camps struck a chord of terror at the mere mention of their names . Lipowa 7 , Sobibor , Chelmno , Poltawa , Belzec , Krzywy-Rog , Budzyn , Krasnik . Ice baths , electric shocks , lashings , wild dogs , testicle crushers . The Death's-Head Corps took in Ukrainian and Baltic Auxiliaries , and the Einsatzkommandos waded knee-deep in blood and turned into drunken , dope-ridden maniacs . Lublin was their heart . In the spring of 1942 Operation Reinhard began in Lublin . The ghetto , a miniature of Warsaw's , was emptied into the camp in the Majdan-Tartarski suburb called Majdanek . As the camp emptied , it was refilled by a draining of the camps and towns around Lublin , then by deportees from outside Poland . In and in and in they poured through the gates of Majdanek , but they never left , and Majdanek was not growing any larger . What was happening in Majdanek ? ? Was Operation Reinhard the same pattern for the daily trains now leaving the Umschlagplatz in Warsaw ? ? Was there another Majdanek in the Warsaw area , as they suspected ? ? Andrei stopped at Litowski Place and looked around quickly at the boundary of civil buildings . His watch told him he was still early . Down the boulevard he could see a portion of the ghetto wall . He found an empty bench , opened a newspaper , and stretched his legs before him . Krakow Boulevard was filled with black Nazi uniforms and the dirty brownish ones of their Auxiliaries . `` Captain Androfski '' ! ! Andrei glanced up over the top of the paper and looked into the mustached , homely face of Sergeant Styka . Styka sat beside him and pumped his hand excitedly . `` I have been waiting across the street at the post office since dawn . I thought you might get in on a morning train '' . `` It's good to see you again , Styka '' . Styka studied his captain . He almost broke into tears . To him , Andrei Androfski had always been the living symbol of a Polish officer . His captain was thin and haggard and his beautiful boots were worn and shabby . `` Remember to call me Jan '' , Andrei said . Styka nodded and sniffed and blew his nose vociferously . `` When that woman found me and told me that you needed me I was never so happy since before the war '' . `` I'm lucky that you were still living in Lublin '' . Styka grumbled about fate . `` For a time I thought of trying to reach the Free Polish Forces , but one thing led to another . I got a girl in trouble and we had to get married . Not a bad girl . So we have three children and responsibilities . I work at the granary . Nothing like the old days in the army , but I get by . Who complains ? ? Many times I tried to reach you , but I never knew how . I came to Warsaw twice , but there was that damned ghetto wall '' `` I understand '' . Styka blew his nose again . `` Were you able to make the arrangements '' ? ? Andrei asked . `` There is a man named Grabski who is the foreman in charge of the bricklayers at Majdanek . I did exactly as instructed . I told him you are on orders from the Home Army to get inside Majdanek so you can make a report to the government in exile in London '' . `` His answer '' ? ? `` Ten thousand zlotys '' . `` Can he be trusted '' ? ? `` He is aware he will not live for twenty-four hours if he betrays you '' . `` Good man , Styka '' . `` Captain Jan must you go inside Majdanek ? ? The stories Everyone really knows what is happening there '' . `` Not everyone , Styka '' . `` What good will it really do '' ? ? `` I don't know . Perhaps perhaps there is a shred of conscience left in the human race . Perhaps if they know the story there will be a massive cry of indignation '' . `` Do you really believe that , Jan '' ? ? `` I have to believe it '' . Styka shook his head slowly . `` I am only a simple soldier . I cannot think things out too well . Until I was transferred into the Seventh Ulanys I was like every other Pole in my feeling about Jews . I hated you when I first came in . But my captain might have been a Jew , but he wasn't a Jew . What I mean is , he was a Pole and the greatest soldier in the Ulanys . Hell , sir . The men of our company had a dozen fights defending your name . You never knew about it , but by God , we taught them respect for Captain Androfski '' . Andrei smiled . `` Since the war I have seen the way the Germans have behaved and I think , Holy Mother , we have behaved like this for hundreds of years . Why '' ? ? `` How can you tell an insane man to reason or a blind man to see '' ? ? `` But we are neither blind nor insane . The men of your company would not allow your name dishonored . Why do we let the Germans do this '' ? ? `` I have sat many hours with this , Styka . All I ever wanted was to be a free man in my own country . I've lost faith , Styka . I used to love this country and believe that someday we'd win our battle for equality . But now I think I hate it very much '' . `` And do you really think that the world outside Poland will care any more than we do '' ? ? The question frightened Andrei . `` Please don't go inside Majdanek '' . `` I'm still a soldier in a very small way , Styka '' . It was an answer that Styka understood . Grabski's shanty was beyond the bridge over the River Bystrzyca near the rail center . Grabski sat in a sweat-saturated undershirt , cursing the excessive heat which clamped an uneasy stillness before sundown . He was a square brick of a man with a moon-round face and sunken Polish features . Flies swarmed around the bowl of lentils in which he mopped thick black bread . Half of it dripped down his chin . He washed it down with beer and produced a deep-seated belch . `` Well '' ? ? Andrei demanded . Grabski looked at the pair of them . He grunted a sort of `` yes '' answer . `` My cousin works at the Labor Bureau . He can make you work papers . It will take a few days . I will get you inside the guard camp as a member of my crew . I don't know if I can get you into the inner camp . Maybe yes , maybe no , but you can observe everything from the roof of a barrack we are building '' . Grabski slurped his way to the bottom of the soup bowl . `` Can't understand why the hell anyone wants to go inside that son-of-a-bitch place '' . `` Orders from the Home Army '' . `` Why ? ? Nothing there but Jews '' . Andrei shrugged . `` We get strange orders '' . `` Well -- what about the money '' ? ? Andrei peeled off five one-thousand-zloty notes . Grabski had never seen so much money . His broad flat fingers , petrified into massive sausages by years of bricklaying , snatched the bills clumsily . `` This ain't enough '' . `` You get the rest when I'm safely out of Majdanek '' . `` I ain't taking no goddamned chances for no Jew business '' . Andrei and Styka were silent . She was getting real dramatic . I'd have been more impressed if I hadn't remembered that she'd played Hedda Gabler in her highschool dramatics course . I didn't want her back on that broken record . `` Nothing's free in the whole goddam world '' , was all I could think of to say . When I'd delivered myself of that gem there was nothing to do but order up another drink . `` I am '' , she said . I'd forgotten all about Thelma and the Kentucky Derby and how it was Thelma's fifty dollars I was spending . It was just me and Eileen getting drunk together like we used to in the old days , and me staring at her across the table crazy to get my hands on her partly because I wanted to wring her neck because she was so ornery but mostly because she was so wonderful to touch . Drunk or sober she was the most attractive woman in the world for me . I was crazy about her all over again . It was the call of the wild all right . That evening turned out to be hell like all the others . We moved down Broadway from ginmill to ginmill . It was the same old routine . Eileen got to dancing , just a little tiny dancing step to a hummed tune that you could hardly notice , and trying to pick up strange men , but each time I was ready to say to hell with it and walk out she'd pull herself together and talk so understandingly in that sweet husky voice about the good times and the happiness we'd had together and there I was back on the hook . I did have the decency to call up Thelma and tell her I'd met old friends and would be home late . `` I could scratch her eyes out '' , Eileen cried and stamped her foot when I came back from the phone booth . `` You know I don't like my men to have other women . I hate it . I hate it '' . She got so drunk I had to take her home . It was a walk up on Hudson Street . She just about made me carry her upstairs and then she clung to me and wouldn't let me go . There was a man's jacket on the chair and a straw hat on the table . The place smelt of some kind of hair lotion these pimplike characters use . `` What about Ballestre '' ? ? I had to shake her to make her listen . `` Precious . What about him '' ? ? Suddenly she was very mysterious and dramatic . `` Precious and I allow each other absolute freedom . We are above being jealous . He's used to me bringing home strange men . I'll just tell him you're my husband . He can't object to that '' . `` Well I object . If he pokes his nose in here I'll slug him '' . `` That really would be funny '' . She began to laugh . She was still laughing when I grabbed her and started rolling her on the bed . After all I'm made of flesh and blood . I'm not a plaster saint . Waking up was horrible . Never in my life have I felt so remorseful about anything I've done as I did about spending that night with my own wife . We both had hangovers . Eileen declared she couldn't lift her head from the pillow . She lay under the covers making jabbing motions with her forefinger telling me where to look for the coffeepot . I was stumbling in my undershirt trying to find my way around her damn kitchenette when I smelt that sickish sweet hairtonic smell . There was somebody else in the apartment . I stiffened . Honest I could feel the hair stand up on the back of my neck like a dog's that is going to get into a fight . I turned around with the percolator in my hand . My eyes were so bleary I could barely see him but there he was , a little smooth olivefaced guy in a new spring overcoat and a taffycolored fedora . Brown eyes , eyebrow mustache . Oval face without an expression in the world . We didn't have time to speak before Eileen's voice was screeching at us from the bed . `` Joseph Maria Ballestre meet Francis Xavier Bowman . Exboyfriend meet exhusband '' . She gave the nastiest laugh I ever heard . `` And don't either of you forget that I'm not any man's property . If you want to fight , go down on the sidewalk '' . She was enjoying the situation . Imagine that . Eileen was a psychologist all right . Instead of wanting to sock the poor bastard I found myself having a fellowfeeling for him . Maybe he felt the same way . I never felt such a lowdown hound in my life . First thing I knew he was in the kitchenette cooking up the breakfast and I was handing Eileen her coffeecup and she was lying there handsome as a queen among her courtiers . I couldn't face Thelma after that night . I didn't even have the nerve to call her on the telephone . I wrote her that I'd met up with Eileen and that old bonds had proved too strong and asked her to send my clothes down by express . Of course I had to give her Eileen's address , but she never came near us . All she did was write me a pleasant little note about how it was beautiful while it lasted but that now life had parted our ways and it was goodbye forever . She never said a word about the fifty dollars . She added a postscript begging me to be careful about drinking . I must know that that was my greatest weakness underlined three times . Afterwards I learned that Eileen had called Thelma on the telephone and made a big scene about Thelma trying to take her husband away . That finished me with Thelma . Trust Eileen to squeeze all the drama out of a situation . And there I was shacked up with Eileen in that filthy fourth floor attic on Hudson Street . I use the phrase advisedly because there was something positively indecent about our relationship . I felt it and it ate on me all the time , but I didn't know how right I was till later . What I did know was that Precious was always around . He slept in the hall bedroom at the head of the stairs . `` Who do you think pays the rent ? ? You wouldn't have me throw the poor boy out on the street '' , Eileen said when I needled her about it . I said sure that was what I wanted her to do but she paid no attention . Eileen had a wonderful way of not listening to things she didn't want to hear . Still I didn't think she was twotiming me with Precious right then . To be on the safe side I never let Eileen get out of my sight day or night . Precious had me worried . I couldn't make out what his racket was . I'd thought him a pimp or procurer but he didn't seem to be . He was smooth and civil spoken but it seemed to me there was something tough under his selfeffacing manner . Still he let Eileen treat him like a valet . Whenever the place was cleaned or a meal served it was Precious who did the work . I never could find out what his business was . He always seemed to have money in his pocket . The phone had been disconnected but telegrams came for him and notes by special messenger . Now and then he would disappear for several days . `` Connections '' was all he would say with that smooth hurt smile when I put leading questions . `` Oh he's just an international spy '' , Eileen would shout with her screechy laugh . Poor devil he can't have been too happy either . He got no relief from drink because , though sometimes Precious would buy himself a drink if he went out with us in the evening , he'd leave it on the table untouched . When I was in liquor I rode him pretty hard I guess . Occasionally if I pushed him too far he'd give me a look out of narrowed eyes and the hard cruel bony skull would show through that smooth face of his . `` Some day '' , I told Eileen , `` that guy will kill us both '' . She just wouldn't listen . Getting drunk every night was the only way I could handle the situation . Eileen seemed to feel the same way . We still had that much in common . The trouble was drinking cost money . The way Eileen and I were hitting it up , we needed ten or fifteen dollars an evening . Eileen must have wheedled a little out of Precious . I raised some kale by hocking the good clothes I had left over from my respectable uptown life , but when that was gone I didn't have a cent . I don't know what we would have done if Pat O'Dwyer hadn't come to town . Pat O'Dwyer looked like a heavier Jim . He had the same bullet head of curly reddish hair but he didn't have Jim's pokerfaced humor or his brains or his charm . He was a big thick beefy violent man . Now Pat may have been a lecher and a plugugly , but he was a good churchgoing Catholic and he loved his little sister . Those O'Dwyers had that Irish clannishness that made them stick together in spite of politics and everything . Pat took Eileen and me out to dinner at a swell steak house and told us with tears in his eyes how happy he was we had come together again . `` Whom God hath joined '' etcetera . The O'Dwyers were real religious people except for Kate . Now it would be up to me to keep the little girl out of mischief . Pat had been worried as hell ever since she'd lost her job on that fashion magazine . It had gone big with the Hollywood girls when he told them his sister was an editor of Art And Apparel . How about me trying to help her get her job back ? ? All evening Eileen had been as demure as a little girl getting ready for her first communion . It just about blew us both out of the water when Eileen suddenly came out with what she came out with . `` But brother I can't take a job right now '' , she said with her eyes on her ice cream , `` I'm going to have a baby , Francis Xavier's baby , my own husband's baby '' . My first thought was how had it happened so soon , but I counted back on my fingers and sure enough we'd been living together six weeks . Pat meanwhile was bubbling over with sentiment . Greatest thing that ever happened . Now Eileen really would have to settle down to love honor and obey , and she'd have to quit drinking . He'd come East for the christening , by God he would . When we separated that evening Pat pushed a hundred dollar bill into Eileen's hand to help towards a layette . Before he left town Pat saw to it that I was fixed up with a job . Pat had contacts all over the labor movement . A friend of Pat's named Frank Sposato had just muscled into the Portwatchers' Union . The portwatchers were retired longshoremen and small time seafarers off towboats and barges who acted as watchmen on the wharves . Most of them were elderly men . It was responsible and sometimes dangerous work because the thieving is awful in the port of New York . They weren't as well paid as they should have been . One reason the portwatchers let Sposato take them over was to get the protection of his musclemen . Sposato needed a front , some labor stiff with a clean record to act as business agent of the Redhook local . There I was a retired wobbly and structural iron worker who'd never gouged a cent off a fellow worker in my thirty years in the movement . For once radicalism was a recommendation . Sposato couldn't wait to get me hired . With my gray hair and my weatherbeaten countenance I certainly looked the honest working stiff . The things a man will do for a woman . There was one fact which Rector could not overlook , one truth which he could not deny . As long as there were two human beings working together on the same project , there would be competition and you could no more escape it than you could expect to escape the grave . No matter how devoted a man was , no matter how fully he gave his life to the Lord , he could never extinguish that one spark of pride that gave him definition as an individual . All of the jobs in the mission might be equal in the eyes of the Lord , but they were certainly not equal in the eyes of the Lord's servants . It was only natural that Fletcher would strive for a position in which he could make the decisions . Even Rector himself was prey to this spirit of competition and he knew it , not for a more exalted office in the hierarchy of the church -- his ambitions for the bishopry had died very early in his career -- but for the one clear victory he had talked about to the colonel . He was not sure how much of this desire was due to his devotion to the church and how much was his own ego , demanding to be satisfied , for the two were intertwined and could not be separated . He wanted desperately to see Kayabashi defeated , the Communists in the village rooted out , the mission standing triumphant , for in the triumph of the Lord he himself would be triumphant , too . But perhaps this was a part of the eternal plan , that man's ambition when linked with God would be a driving , indefatigable force for good in the world . He sighed . How foolish it was to try to fathom the truth in an area where only faith would suffice . He would have to work without questioning the motives which made him work and content himself with the thought that the eventual victory , however it was brought about , would be sweet indeed . His first move was to send Hino to the village to spend a few days . His arm had been giving him some trouble and Rector was not enough of a medical expert to determine whether it had healed improperly or whether Hino was simply rebelling against the tedious work in the print shop , using the stiffness in his arm as an excuse . In any event Rector sent him to the local hospital to have it checked , telling him to keep his ears open while he was in the village to see if he could find out what Kayabashi was planning . Hino was elated at the prospect . He was allowed to spend his nights at an inn near the hospital and he was given some extra money to go to the pachinko parlor -- an excellent place to make contact with the enemy . He left with all the joyous spirit of a child going on a holiday , nodding attentively as Rector gave him his final instructions . He was to get involved in no arguments ; ; he was to try to make no converts ; ; he was simply to listen and report back what he heard . It was a ridiculous situation and Rector knew it , for Hino , frankly partisan , openly gregarious , would make a poor espionage agent . If he wanted to know anything , he would end up asking about it point-blank , but in this guileless manner he would probably receive more truthful answers than if he tried to get them by indirection . In all of his experience in the mission field Rector had never seen a convert quite like Hino . From the moment that Hino had first walked into the mission to ask for a job , any job -- his qualifications neatly written on a piece of paper in a precise hand -- he had been ready to become a Christian . He had already been studying the Bible ; ; he knew the fundamentals , and after studying with Fletcher for a time he approached Rector , announced that he wanted to be baptized and that was that . Rector had never been able to find out much about Hino's past . Hino talked very little about himself except for the infrequent times when he used a personal illustration in connection with another subject . Putting the pieces of this mosaic together , Rector had the vague outlines of a biography . Hino was the fourth son of an elderly farmer who lived on the coast , in Chiba , and divided his life between the land and the sea , supplementing the marginal livelihood on his small rented farm with seasonal employment on a fishing boat . Without exception Hino's brothers turned to either one or both of their father's occupations , but Hino showed a talent for neither and instead spent most of his time on the beach where he repaired nets and proved immensely popular as a storyteller . He had gone into the Japanese navy , had been trained as an officer , had participated in one or two battles -- he never went into detail regarding his military experience -- and at the age of twenty-five , quite as a bolt out of the blue , he had walked into the mission as if he belonged here and had become a Christian . Rector was often curious ; ; often tempted to ask questions but he never did . If and when Hino decided to tell him about his experiences , he would do so unasked . Rector had no doubt that Hino would come back from the village bursting with information , ready to impart it with his customary gusto , liberally embellished with his active imagnation . When the telephone rang on the day after Hino went down to the village , Rector had a hunch it would be Hino with some morsel of information too important to wait until his return , for there were few telephones in the village and the phone in Rector's office rarely rang unless it was important . He was surprised to find Kayabashi's secretary on the other end of the line . He was even more startled when he heard what Kayabashi wanted . The oyabun was entertaining a group of dignitaries , the secretary said , businessmen from Tokyo for the most part , and Kayabashi wished to show them the mission . They had never seen one before and had expressed a curiosity about it . `` Oh '' ? ? Rector said . `` I guess it will be all right . When would the oyabun like to bring his guests up here '' ? ? `` This afternoon '' , the secretary said . `` At three o'clock if it will be of convenience to you at that time '' . `` All right '' , Rector said . `` I will be expecting them '' . He was about to hang up the phone , but a note of hesitancy in the secretary's voice left the conversation open . He had something more to say . `` I beg to inquire if the back is now safe for travelers '' , he said . Rector laughed despite himself . `` Unless the oyabun has been working on it '' , he said , then checked himself and added : `` You can tell Kayabashi-san that the back road is in very good condition and will be quite safe for his party to use '' . `` Arigato gosaimasu '' . The secretary sighed with relief and then the telephone clicked in Rector's hand . Rector had no idea why Kayabashi wanted to visit the mission . For the oyabun to make such a trip was either a sign of great weakness or an indication of equally great confidence , and from all the available information it was probably the latter . Kayabashi must feel fairly certain of his victory in order to make a visit like this , a trip which could be so easily misinterpreted by the people in the village . At the same time , it was unlikely that any businessmen would spend a day in a Christian mission out of mere curiosity . No , Kayabashi was bringing his associates here for a specific purpose and Rector would not be able to fathom it until they arrived . When he had given the call a few moments thought , he went into the kitchen to ask Mrs. Yamata to prepare tea and sushi for the visitors , using the formal English china and the silver tea service which had been donated to the mission , then he went outside to inspect the grounds . Fujimoto had a pile of cuttings near one side of the lawn . Rector asked him to move it for the time being ; ; he wanted the mission compound to be effortlessly spotless . A good initial impression would be important now . He went into the print shop , where Fletcher had just finished cleaning the press . `` How many pamphlets do we have in stock '' ? ? Rector said . `` I should say about a hundred thousand '' , Fletcher said . `` Why '' ? ? `` I would like to enact a little tableau this afternoon '' , Rector said , He explained about the visit and the effect he wished to create , the picture of a very busy mission . He did not wish to deceive Kayabashi exactly , just to display the mission activities in a graphic and impressive manner . Fletcher nodded as he listened to the instructions and said he would arrange the things Rector requested . Rector's next stop was at the schoolroom , where Mavis was monitoring a test . He beckoned to her from the door and she slipped quietly outside . He told her of the visitors and then of his plans . `` How many children do you have present today '' ? ? He said . She looked back toward the schoolroom . `` Fifteen '' , she said . `` No , only fourteen . The little Ito girl had had to go home . She has a pretty bad cold '' . `` I would like them to appear very busy today , not busy exactly , but joyous , exuberant , full of life . I want to create the impression of a compound full of children . Do you think you can manage it '' ? ? Mavis smiled . `` I'll try '' . As Rector was walking back toward the residential hall , Johnson came out of the basement and bounded up to him . The altercation in the coffee house had done little to dampen his spirits , but he was still a little wary around Rector for they had not yet discussed the incident . `` I think I've fixed the pump so we won't have to worry about it for a long time '' , he said . `` I've adjusted the gauge so that the pump cuts out before the water gets too low . '' `` Fine '' , Rector said . He looked out over the expanse of the compound . It was going to take a lot of activity to fill it . `` Have you ever operated a transit '' ? ? He said . `` No , sir '' , Johnson said . `` You are about to become a first-class surveyor '' , Rector said . `` When Konishi gets back with the jeep , I want you to round up two or three Japanese boys . Konishi can help you . You'll find an old transit in the basement . The glass is out of it , but that won't matter . It looks pretty efficient and that's the important thing '' . He went on to explain what he had in mind . Johnson nodded . He said he could do it . Rector was warming to his over-all strategy by the time he got back to the residential hall . It was rather a childish game , all in all , but everybody seemed to be getting into the spirit of the thing and he could not remember when he had enjoyed planning anything quite so much . He was not sure what effect it would have , but that was really beside the point when you got right down to it . He was not going to lose the mission by default , and whatever reason Kayabashi had for bringing his little sight-seeing group to the mission , he was going to be in for a surprise . He found Elizabeth in the parlor and asked her to make sure everything was in order in the residential hall , and then to take charge of the office while the party was here . When everything had been done , Rector went back to his desk to occupy himself with his monthly report until three o'clock . At two thirty he sent Fujimoto to the top of the wall at the northeast corner of the mission to keep an eye on the ridge road and give a signal when he first glimpsed the approach of Kayabashi's party . Then Rector , attired in his best blue serge suit , sat in a chair out on the lawn , in the shade of a tree , smoking a cigarette and waiting . The air was cooler here , and the lacy pattern of the trees threw a dappled shadow on the grass , an effect which he found pleasant . She concluded by asking him to name another hour should this one be inconvenient . The fish took the bait . He replied that he could not imagine what importance there might be in thus meeting with a stranger , but -- joy of joys , he would be at home at the hour mentioned . But when she called he had thought better of the matter and decided not to involve himself in a new entanglement . She was told by the manservant who opened the door that his lordship was engaged on work from which he had left strict orders he was not to be disturbed . Claire was bitterly disappointed but determined not to let the rebuff daunt her purpose . She wrote again and now , abandoning for the moment the theme of love , she asked for help in the matter of her career . She could act and she could write . His lordship was concerned in the management of Drury Lane but , if there were no opportunities there , would he read and criticize her novel ? ? At last he consented to meet her , and following that brief interview Claire wrote him a yet more remarkable proposal : Have you any objection to the following plan ? ? On Thursday evening we may go out of town together by some stage or mail about the distance of ten or twelve miles . There we shall be free and unknown ; ; we can return the following morning She concluded by asking for a brief interview -- `` to settle with you where '' -- and she threw in a tribute to his `` gentle manners '' and `` the wild originality of your countenance '' . She opened his reply with trembling fingers he agreed ! ! And he would see her that evening . Victory at last ! ! At their meeting he told her not to bother about `` where '' -- he would attend to that . There was one of the new forte-pianos in the room and , as Claire rose to go , he asked her to sing him one song before she left . She sang him Scott's charming ballad `` Rosabelle '' , which was the vogue of the moment . She had never sung better . `` Your voice is delightful '' , he approved with a warm smile . `` Tomorrow will be a new experience -- I have never before made love to a nightingale . There have been cooing doves , chattering magpies , thieving jackdaws , a proud peacock , a silly goose , and a harpy eagle -- whom I was silly enough to mate with and who is now busy tearing at my vitals '' . And so they went , he choosing of all places an inn near Medmenham Abbey , scene a generation ago of the obscene orgies of the Hellfire Club . He regaled Claire with an account of the mock mass performed by the cassocked bloods , which he had had at firsthand from old Bud Dodington , one of the leaders of the so-called `` Order '' . Each wore the monkish scourge at his waist but this , it seems , was not employed for self-flagellation . Naked girls danced in the chancel of the Abbey , the youngest and seemingly the most innocent being chosen to read a sermon filled with veiled depravities . The jaded amorist conjured up pictures of the blasphemous rites with relish . Alas , all that belonged to the age of `` Devil Dashwood '' and `` Wicked Wilkes '' , abbot and beadsman of the Order ! ! The casual seduction of a seventeen-year-old bluestocking seemed tame by comparison . They passed close by the turn to Bishopsgate . A scant half mile away Shelley and Mary were doubtless sitting on their diminutive terrace , the air about them scented with stock , and listening to the nightingale who had nested in the big lime tree at the foot of the garden . Charming and peaceful -- but what were charm and peace compared to high adventure ? ? Alone with the fabulous Byron ! ! How many women had longed for the privilege that was hers . How was she to behave , Claire wondered . To be passive , to be girlishly shy was palpably absurd . She was the pursuer as clearly as was Venus in Shakespeare's poem . And while her Adonis did not suffer from inexperience , satiety might well be an equal handicap . No , she would not pretend modesty , but neither must she be crudely bold . Mystery -- that was the thing . In the bedroom she would insist on darkness . With his club foot he might well be grateful . At the inn , which was situated close to a broad weir , Byron was greeted by the landlord with obsequious deference and addressed as `` milord '' . The place was evidently a familiar haunt and Claire wondered what other illicit loves had been celebrated in the comfortable rooms to which they were shown . The fire in the sitting room was lighted . `` What about the bedroom '' ? ? Byron inquired . `` Seems to me last time I was here the grate bellowed out smoke as it might have been preparing us for hell '' . `` We found some owls had built a nest in the chimney , milord , but I promise you you'll never have trouble of that sort again '' . So , not only had he been here before , but it seemed he might well come again . Claire felt suddenly small and cheap , heroine of a trivial episode in the voluminous history of Don Juan . A cold supper was ordered and a bottle of port . When Napoleon's ship had borne him to Elba , French wines had started to cross the Channel , the first shipments in a dozen war-ridden years , but the supplies had not yet reached rural hostelries where the sweet wines of the Spanish peninsula still ruled . As they waited for supper they sat by the fire , glasses in hand , while Byron philosophized as much for his own entertainment as hers . `` Sex is overpriced '' , he said . `` The great Greek tragedies are concerned with man against Fate , not man against man for the prize of a woman's body . So don't see yourself as a heroine or fancy this little adventure is an event of major importance '' . `` The gods seemed to think sex pretty important '' , she rebutted . `` Mars and Venus , Bacchus and Ariadne , Jupiter and Io , Byron and the nymph of the owl's nest . That would be Minerva , I suppose . Wasn't the owl her symbol '' ? ? Byron laughed . `` So you know something of the classics , do you '' ? ? `` Tell me about Minerva , how she behaved , what she did to please you '' . `` I'll tell you nothing . I don't ask you who 'tis you're being unfaithful to , husband or lover . Frankly , I don't care '' . For a moment she thought of answering with the truth but she knew there were men who shied away from virginity , who demanded some degree of education in body as well as mind . `` Very well '' , she said , `` I'll not catechize you . What matter the others so long as I have my place in history '' . She was striking the right note . No man ever had a better opinion of himself and indeed , with one so favored , flattery could hardly seem overdone . Brains and beauty , high position in both the social and intellectual worlds , athlete , fabled lover -- if ever the world was any man's oyster it was his . The light supper over , Claire went to him and , slipping an arm about his shoulder , sat on his knee . He drew her close and , hand on cheek , turned her face to his . Her lips , moist and parted , spoke his name . `` Byron '' ! ! His hand went to her shoulder and pushed aside the knotted scarf that surmounted the striped poplin gown ; ; then , to better purpose , he took hold of the knot and with dextrous fingers , untied it . The bodice beneath was buttoned and , withdrawing his lips from hers , he set her upright on his knee and started to undo it , unhurriedly as if she were a child . But , kindled by his kiss , his caressing hand , her desire was aflame . She sprang up and went swiftly to the bedroom . Lord Byron poured himself another glass of wine and held it up to the candle flame admiring the rich color . He drank slowly with due appreciation . It was an excellent vintage . He rose and went to the bedroom . Pausing in the doorway he said : `` The form of the human female , unlike her mind and her spirit , is the most challenging loveliness in all nature '' . When Claire returned to Bishopsgate she longed to tell them she had become Byron's mistress . By odd coincidence , on the evening of her return Shelley chose to read Parisina , which was the latest of the titled poet's successes . As he declaimed the sonorous measures , it was as much as Claire could do to restrain herself from bursting out with her dramatic tidings . `` Although it is not the best of which he is capable '' , said Shelley as he closed the book , `` it is still poetry of a high order '' . `` If he would only leave the East '' , said Mary . `` I am tired of sultans and scimitars '' . `` The hero of his next poem is Napoleon Bonaparte '' , said Claire , with slightly overdone carelessness . `` How do you know that '' ? ? Demanded Mary . `` I was told it on good authority '' , Claire answered darkly . `` I mustn't tell , I mustn't tell '' , she repeated to herself . `` I promised him I wouldn't '' . Chapter 9 winter came , and with it Mary's baby -- a boy as she had wished . William , he was called , in honor of the man who was at once Shelley's pensioner and his most bitter detractor . With a pardonable irony Shelley wrote to the father who had publicly disowned his daughter : `` Fanny and Mrs. Godwin will probably be glad to hear that Mary has safely recovered from a very favorable confinement , and that her child is well '' . At the same time another child -- this one of Shelley's brain -- was given to the world : Alastor , a poem of pervading beauty in which the reader may gaze into the still depths of a fine mind's musings . Alastor was published only to be savagely attacked , contemptuously ignored . Shelley sent a copy to Southey , a former friend , and another to Godwin . Neither acknowledged the gift . Only Mary's praise sustained him in his disappointment . She understood completely . Not a thought nor a cadence was missed in her summary of appreciation . `` You have made the labor worth while '' , he said to her , smiling . `` And in the future , since I write for a public of one , I can save the poor publishers from wasting their money '' . `` A public of one '' , Mary echoed reprovingly . `` How can you say such a thing ? ? There will be thousands who will thrill to the loveliness of Alastor . There are some even now . What about that dear , clever Mr. Thynne ? ? I am sure he is in raptures '' . `` Poor Mr. Thynne , he always has to be trotted out for my encouragement '' . `` There are other Mr. Thynnes . Not everyone is bewitched by Byron's caliphs and harem beauties '' . Mary's supercritical attitude toward Byron had nothing to do with his moral disrepute . She was resentful of his easy success as compared with Shelley's failure . The same month that Alastor was published , Murray sold twenty thousand copies of The Siege Of Corinth , a slovenly bit of Byronism that even Shelley's generosity rebelled at . The lordly poet was at low-water mark . The careless writing was in keeping with his mood of savage discontent . On all sides doors were being slammed in his face . The previous scandals , gaily diverting as they were , had only served to increase his popularity . Now , under the impact of his wife's disclosures , he was brought suddenly to the realization that there was a limit to tolerance , however brilliant , however far-famed the offender might be . He tried defiance and openly flaunted his devotion to his half sister , but he soon saw , as did she , that this course if persisted in would involve them in a common ruin . For the moment there was no woman in his life , and it was this vacuum that had given Claire her opportunity . But the liaison successfully started in the last days of autumn was now languishing . Byron , since the separation from his wife had been living in a smallish house in Piccadilly Terrace . He refused to bring Claire to it even as an occasional visitor , claiming that his every move was watched by spies of the Milbankes . Beckworth handed the pass to the colonel . He had thought that the suggestion of taking it himself would tip the colonel in the direction of serving his own order , but the slip of paper was folded and absently thrust into the colonel's belt . Despite his yearning , the colonel would not go down to see the men come through the lines . He would remain in the tent , waiting impatiently , occupied by some trivial task . -- Beckworth . -- Sir ? ? -- Fetch me the copies of everything B and C companies have requisitioned in the last six months . -- The last six months , sir ? ? -- You heard me . There's a lot of waste going on here . It's got to stop . I want to take a look . This is no damned holiday , Beckworth . Get busy . -- Yes , sir . Beckworth left the tent . Below he could see the bright torches lighting the riverbank . He glanced back . The colonel crouched tensely on one of the folding chairs , methodically tearing at his thumbnail . The bombproof was a low-ceilinged structure of heavy timbers covered with earth . It stood some fifty paces from the edge of the bank . From the outside , it seemed no more than a low drumlin , a lump on the dark earth . A crude ladder ran down to a wooden floor . Two slits enabled observers to watch across the river . The place smelled strongly of rank , fertile earth , rotting wood and urine . The plank floor was slimed beneath Watson's boots . At least the Union officer had been decent enough to provide a candle . There was no place to sit , but Watson walked slowly from the ladder to the window slits and back , stooping slightly to avoid striking his head on the heavy beams . In the corner was the soldier with the white flag . He stood stiffly erect , clutching the staff , his body half hidden by the limp cloth . Watson hardly looked at him . The man had come floundering aboard the flat-bottomed barge at the last instant , brandishing the flag of truce . Someone had hauled him over the side , and he had remained silent while they crossed . An officer with a squad of men had been waiting on the bank . The men in the boats had started yelling happily at first sight of the officer , two of them calling him Billy . When the boat had touched , the weaker ones and the two wounded men had been lifted out and carried away by the soldiers . Watson had presented his pouch and been led to the bombproof . The officer had told him that both lists must be checked . Watson had given his name and asked for a safe-conduct pass . The officer , surprised , said he would have to see . Watson had nodded absently and muttered that he would check the lists himself later . He had peered through the darkness at the rampart . The men he would take back across the river stood there , but he turned away from them . He wanted no part of the emotions of the exchange , no memory of the joy and gratitude that other men felt . He had hoped to be alone in the bombproof , but the soldier had followed him . Though Watson carefully ignored the man , he could not deny his presence . Perhaps it would be better to speak to him , since silence could not exorcise his form . Watson glanced briefly at him , seeing only a body rigidly erect behind the languid banner . -- We won't be too long . If my pass is approved , I may be a half hour . The soldier answered in a curious , muffled voice , his lips barely moving . Watson turned away and did not see the man's knees buckle and his body sag . -- Yes , sir . He had acknowledged the man . It was easier to think now , Watson decided . The stiff figure in the corner no longer blocked his thoughts . He paced slowly , stooping , staring at the damp , slippery floor . He tried to order the words of the three Union officers , seeking to create some coherent portrait of the dead boy . But he groped blindly . His lack of success steadily eroded his interest . He stopped pacing , leaned against the dank , timbered wall and let his mind drift . A feeling of futility , an enervation of mind greater than any fatigue he had ever known , seeped through him . What in the name of God was he doing , crouched in a timbered pit on the wrong bank of the river ? ? Why had he crossed the dark water , to bring back a group of reclaimed soldiers or to skulk in a foul-smelling hole ? ? He grew annoyed and at the same time surprised at that emotion . He was conscious of a growing sense of absurdity . Hillman had written it all out , hadn't he ? ? Wasn't the report official enough ? ? What did he hope to accomplish here ? ? Hillman had ordered him not to leave the far bank . Prompted by a guilty urge , he had disobeyed the order of a man he respected . For what ? ? To tell John something he would find out for himself . The figure in the corner belched loudly , a deep , liquid eruption . Watson snorted and then laughed aloud . Exactly ! ! The soldier's voice was muffled again , stricken with chagrin . He clutched the staff , and his dark eyes blinked apologetically . -- 'scuse me , sir . -- Let's get out of here . Watson ran up the ladder and stood for a second sucking in the cool air that smelled of mud and river weeds . To his left , the two skiffs dented their sharp bows into the soft bank . The flat-bottomed boat swung slowly to the pull of the current . A soldier held the end of a frayed rope . Three Union guards appeared , carrying their rifles at ready . Watson stared at them curiously . They were stocky men , well fed and clean-shaven , with neat uniforms and sturdy boots . Behind them shambled a long column of weak , tattered men . The thin gray figures raised a hoarse , cawing cry like the call of a bird flock . They moved toward the skiffs with shocking eagerness , elbowing and shoving . Four men were knocked down , but did not attempt to rise . They crept down the muddy slope toward the waiting boats . The Union soldiers grounded arms and settled into healthy , indifferent postures to watch the feeble boarding of the skiffs . The crawling men tried to rise and fell again . No one moved to them . Watson watched two of them flounder into the shallow water and listened to their voices beg shrilly . In a confused , soaked and stumbling shift of bodies and lifting arms , the two men were dragged into the same skiff . The third crawling man forced himself erect . He swayed like a drunkard , his arms milling in slow circles . He paced forward unsteadily , leaning too far back , his head tilted oddly . His steps were short and stiff , and , with his head thrown back , his progress was a supercilious strut . He appeared to be peering haughtily down his nose at the crowded and unclean vessel that would carry him to freedom . He stalked into the water and fell heavily over the side of the flat-bottomed barge , his weight nearly swamping the craft . Watson looked for the fourth man . He had reached the three passive guards ; ; he crept in an incertain manner , patting the ground before him . The guards did not look at him . The figure on the earth halted , seemingly bewildered . He sank back on his thin haunches like a weary hound . Then he began to crawl again . Watson watched the creeping figure . He felt a spectator interest . Would the man make it or not ? ? If only there was a clock for him to crawl against . If he failed to reach the riverbank in five minutes , say , then the skiffs would pull away and leave him groping in the mud . Say three minutes to make it sporting . Still the guards did not move , but stood inert , aloof from the slow-scrambling man . The figure halted , and Watson gasped . The man began to creep in the wrong direction , deceived by a slight rise in the ground ! ! He turned slowly and began to crawl back up the bank toward the rampart . Watson raced for him , his boots slamming the soft earth . The guards came to life with astonishing menace . They spun and flung their rifles up . Watson gesticulated wildly . One man dropped to his knee for better aim . -- Let me help him , for the love of God ! ! The guards lowered their rifles and their rifles and peered at Watson with sullen , puzzled faces . Watson pounded to the crawling man and stopped , panting heavily . He reached down and closed his fingers on the man's upper arm . Beneath his clutch , a flat strip of muscle surged on the bone . Watson bent awkwardly and lifted the man to his feet . Watson stared into a cadaverous face . Two clotted balls the color of mucus rolled between fiery lids . Light sticks of fingers , the tips gummy with dark earth , patted at Watson's throat . The man's voice was a sweet , patient whisper . -- Henry said that he'd take my arm and get me right there . But you ain't Henry . -- no . -- It don't matter . Is it far ? ? How far could it be , Watson thought bleakly , how far can a blind man crawl ? ? Another body length or all the rest of his nighted life ? ? -- Not far . -- You talk deep . Not like us fellas . It raises the voice , bein in camp . You Secesh ? ? -- yes . Come on , now . Can you walk ? ? -- Why , course I can . I can walk real good . Watson stumbled down the bank . The man leaned his frail body against Watson's shoulder . He was no heavier than a child . Watson paused for breath . The man wheezed weakly , his fetid breath beating softly against Watson's neck . His sweet whisper came after great effort . -- Oh , Christ . I wish you was Henry . He promised to take me . -- hush . We're almost there . Watson supported the man to the edge of the bank and passed the frail figure over the bow of the nearest skiff . The man swayed on a thwart , turning his ruined eyes from side to side . Watson turned away , sickened for the first time in many months . He heard the patient voice calling . -- Henry ? ? Where are you , Henry ? ? -- Make him lie down ! ! Watson snatched a deep breath . He had not meant to shout . He stood with his back to the skiff . The men mewed and scratched , begging to be taken away . Watson spoke bewilderedly to the dark night flecked with pine-knot torches . -- Goddamn you ! ! What do you do to them ? ? Intelligence jabbed at him accusingly . He was angry , sickened . He had not felt that during the afternoon . No , nor later . All his emotions had been inward , self-conscious . In war , on a night like this , it was only the outward emotions that mattered , what could be flung out into the darkness to damage others . Yes . That was it . He was sure of it . John's type of man allowed this sort of thing to happen . What a fool he had been to think of his brother ! ! So Charles was dead . What did it matter ? ? His name had been crossed off a list . Already his cool body lay in the ground . What words had any meaning ? ? What had he thought of , to go to John , grovel and beg understanding ? ? To confess with a canvas chair as a prie-dieu , gouging at his heart until a rough and stupid hand bade him rise and go ? ? Men were slaughtered every day , tumbled into eternity like so many torn parcels flung down a portable chute . What made him think John had a right to witness his brother's humiliation ? ? What right had John to any special consideration ? ? Was John better , more deserving ? ? To hell with John . Let him chafe with impatience to see Charles , rip open the note with trembling hands and read the formal report in Hillman's beautiful , schoolmaster's hand . John would curse . He believed that brave boys didn't cry . Watson spat on the ground . He was grimly satisfied . He had stupidly thought himself compelled to ease his brother's pain . Now he knew perfectly that he had but longed to increase his own suffering . I would not want to be one of those writers who begin each morning by exclaiming , `` O Gogol , O Chekhov , O Thackeray and Dickens , what would you have made of a bomb shelter ornamented with four plaster-of-Paris ducks , a birdbath , and three composition gnomes with long beards and red mobcaps '' ? ? As I say , I wouldn't want to begin a day like this , but I often wonder what the dead would have done . But the shelter is as much a part of my landscape as the beech and horse-chestnut trees that grow on the ridge . I can see it from this window where I write . It was built by the Pasterns , and stands on the acre of ground that adjoins our property . It bulks under a veil of thin , new grass , like some embarrassing fact of physicalness , and I think Mrs. Pastern set out the statuary to soften its meaning . It would have been like her . She was a pale woman . Sitting on her terrace , sitting in her parlor , sitting anywhere , she ground an axe of self-esteem . Offer her a cup of tea and she would say , `` Why , these cups look just like a set I gave to the Salvation Army last year '' . Show her the new swimming pool and she would say , slapping her ankle , `` I suppose this must be where you breed your gigantic mosquitoes '' . Hand her a chair and she would say , `` Why , it's a nice imitation of those Queen Anne chairs I inherited from Grandmother Delancy '' . These trumps were more touching than they were anything else , and seemed to imply that the nights were long , her children ungrateful , and her marriage bewilderingly threadbare . Twenty years ago , she would have been known as a golf widow , and the sum of her manner was perhaps one of bereavement . She usually wore weeds , and a stranger watching her board a train might have guessed that Mr. Pastern was dead , but Mr. Pastern was far from dead . He was marching up and down the locker room of the Grassy Brae Golf Club shouting , `` Bomb Cuba ! ! Bomb Berlin ! ! Let's throw a little nuclear hardware at them and show them who's boss '' . He was brigadier of the club's locker-room light infantry , and at one time or another declared war on Russia , Czechoslovakia , Yugoslavia , and China . It all began on an autumn afternoon -- and who , after all these centuries , can describe the fineness of an autumn day ? ? One might pretend never to have seen one before , or , to more purpose , that there would never be another like it . The clear and searching sweep of sun on the lawns was like a climax of the year's lights . Leaves were burning somewhere and the smoke smelled , for all its ammoniac acidity , of beginnings . The boundless blue air was stretched over the zenith like the skin of a drum . Leaving her house one late afternoon , Mrs. Pastern stopped to admire the October light . It was the day to canvass for infectious hepatitis . Mrs. Pastern had been given sixteen names , a bundle of literature , and a printed book of receipts . It was her work to go among her neighbors and collect their checks . Her house stood on a rise of ground , and before she got into her car she looked at the houses below . Charity as she knew it was complex and reciprocal , and almost every roof she saw signified charity . Mrs. Balcolm worked for the brain . Mrs. Ten Eyke did mental health . Mrs. Trenchard worked for the blind . Mrs. Horowitz was in charge of diseases of the nose and throat . Mrs. Trempler was tuberculosis , Mrs. Surcliffe was Mothers' March of Dimes , Mrs. Craven was cancer , and Mrs. Gilkson did the kidney . Mrs. Hewlitt led the birthcontrol league , Mrs. Ryerson was arthritis , and way in the distance could be seen the slate roof of Ethel Littleton's house , a roof that signified gout . Mrs. Pastern undertook the work of going from house to house with the thoughtless resignation of an honest and traditional laborer . It was her destiny ; ; it was her life . Her mother had done it before her , and even her old grandmother , who had collected money for smallpox and unwed mothers . Mrs. Pastern had telephoned most of her neighbors in advance , and most of them were ready for her . She experienced none of the suspense of some poor stranger selling encyclopedias . Here and there she stayed to visit and drink a glass of sherry . The contributions were ahead of what she had got the previous year , and while the money , of course , was not hers , it excited her to stuff her kit with big checks . She stopped at the Surcliffes' after dusk , and had a Scotch-and-soda . She stayed too late , and when she left , it was dark and time to go home and cook supper for her husband . `` I got a hundred and sixty dollars for the hepatitis fund '' , she said excitedly when he walked in . `` I did everybody on my list but the Blevins and the Flannagans . I want to get my kit in tomorrow morning -- would you mind doing them while I cook the dinner '' ? ? `` But I don't know the Flannagans '' , Charlie Pastern said . `` Nobody does , but they gave me ten last year '' . He was tired , he had his business worries , and the sight of his wife arranging pork chops in the broiler only seemed like an extension of a boring day . He was happy enough to take the convertible and race up the hill to the Blevins' , thinking that they might give him a drink . But the Blevins were away ; ; their maid gave him an envelope with a check in it and shut the door . Turning in at the Flannagans' driveway , he tried to remember if he had ever met them . The name encouraged him , because he always felt that he could handle the Irish . There was a glass pane in the front door , and through this he could see into a hallway where a plump woman with red hair was arranging flowers . `` Infectious hepatitis '' , he shouted heartily . She took a good look at herself in the mirror before she turned and , walking with very small steps , started toward the door . `` Oh , please come in '' , she said . The girlish voice was nearly a whisper . She was not a girl , he could see . Her hair was dyed , and her bloom was fading , and she must have been crowding forty , but she seemed to be one of those women who cling to the manners and graces of a pretty child of eight . `` Your wife just called '' , she said , separating one word from another , exactly like a child . `` And I am not sure that I have any cash -- any money , that is -- but if you will wait just a minute I will write you out a check if I can find my checkbook . Won't you step into the living room , where it's cozier '' ? ? A fire had just been lighted , he saw , and things had been set out for drinks , and , like any stray , his response to these comforts was instantaneous . Where was Mr. Flannagan , he wondered . Travelling home on a late train ? ? Changing his clothes upstairs ? ? Taking a shower ? ? At the end of the room there was a desk heaped with papers , and she began to riffle these , making sighs and and noises of girlish exasperation . `` I am terribly sorry to keep you waiting '' , she said , `` but won't you make yourself a little drink while you wait ? ? Everything's on the table '' . `` What train does Mr. Flannagan come out on '' ? ? `` Mr. Flannagan is away '' , she said . Her voice dropped . `` Mr. Flannagan has been away for six weeks . '' `` I'll have a drink , then , if you'll have one with me '' . `` If you will promise to make it weak '' . `` Sit down '' , he said , `` and enjoy your drink and look for your checkbook later . The only way to find things is to relax '' . All in all , they had six drinks . She described herself and her circumstances unhesitatingly . Mr. Flannagan manufactured plastic tongue depressors . He travelled all over the world . She didn't like to travel . Planes made her feel faint , and in Tokyo , where she had gone that summer , she had been given raw fish for breakfast and so she had come straight home . She and her husband had formerly lived in New York , where she had many friends , but Mr. Flannagan thought the country would be safer in case of war . She would rather live in danger than die of loneliness and boredom . She had no children ; ; she had made no friends . `` I've seen you , though , before '' , she said with enormous coyness , patting his knee . `` I've seen you walking your dogs on Sunday and driving by in the convertible . '' The thought of this lonely woman sitting at her window touched him , although he was even more touched by her plumpness . Sheer plumpness , he knew , is not a vital part of the body and has no procreative functions . It serves merely as an excess cushion for the rest of the carcass . And knowing its humble place in the scale of things , why did he , at this time of life , seem almost ready to sell his soul for plumpness ? ? The remarks she made about the sufferings of a lonely woman seemed so broad at first that he didn't know what to make of them , but after the sixth drink he put his arm around her and suggested that they go upstairs and look for her checkbook there . `` I've never done this before '' , she said later , when he was arranging himself to leave . Her voice shook with feeling , and he thought it lovely . He didn't doubt her truthfulness , although he had heard the words a hundred times . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , shaking their dresses down over their white shoulders . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , waiting for the elevator in the hotel corridor . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , pouring another whiskey . `` I've never done this before '' , they always said , putting on their stockings . On ships at sea , on railroad trains , in summer hotels with mountain views , they always said , `` I've never done this before '' . `` Where have you been '' ? ? Mrs. Pastern asked sadly , when he came in . `` It's after eleven '' . `` I had a drink with the Flannagans '' . `` She told me he was in Germany '' . `` He came home unexpectedly '' . Charlie ate some supper in the kitchen and went into the TV room to hear the news . `` Bomb them '' ! ! He shouted . `` Throw a little nuclear hardware at them ! ! Show them who's boss '' ! ! But in bed he had trouble sleeping . He thought first of his son and daughter , away at college . He loved them . It was the only meaning of the word that he had ever known . Then he played nine imaginary holes of golf , choosing his handicap , his irons , his stance , his opponents , and his weather in detail , but the green of the links seemed faded in the light of his business worries . His money was tied up in a Nassau hotel , an Ohio pottery works , and a detergent for window-washing , and luck had been running against him . His worries harried him up out of bed , and he lighted a cigarette and went to the window . In the starlight he could see the trees stripped of their leaves . During the summer he had tried to repair some of his losses at the track , and the bare trees reminded him that his pari-mutuel tickets would still be lying , like leaves , in the gutters near Belmont and Saratoga . Maple and ash , beech and elm , one hundred to win on Three in the fourth , fifty to win on Six in the third , one hundred to win on Two in the eighth . Children walking home from school would scuff through what seemed to be his foliage . Then , getting back into bed , he thought unashamedly of Mrs. Flannagan , planning where they would next meet and what they would do . There are , he thought , so few true means of forgetfulness in this life that why should he shun the medicine even when the medicine seemed , as it did , a little crude ? ? It was not as though she noted clearly that her nephews had not been to see her for ten years , not since their last journey eastward to witness their Uncle Izaak being lowered into the rocky soil ; ; that aside from due notification of certain major events in their lives ( two marriages , two births , one divorce ) , Christmas and Easter cards of the traditional sort had been the only thin link she had with them through the widowed years . Her thoughts were not discrete . But there was a look about her mouth as though she were tasting lemons . She grasped the chair arms and brought her thin body upright , like a bird alert for flight . She turned and walked stiffly into the parlor to the dainty-legged escritoire , warped and cracked now from fifty years in an atmosphere of sea spray . There she extracted two limp vellum sheets and wrote off the letters , one to Abel , one to Mark . Once her trembling hand , with the pen grasped tight in it , was pressed against the paper the words came sharply , smoothly , as authoritatively as they would dropping from her own lips . And the stiffly regal look of them , she saw grimly , lacked the quaver of age which , thwarting the efforts of her amazing will , ran through her spoken words like a thin ragged string . `` Please come down as soon as you conveniently can '' , the upright letters stalked from the broad-nibbed pen , `` I have an important matter to discuss with you '' . To Abel : `` I am afraid there is not much to amuse small children here . I should be obliged if you could make other arrangements for your daughters . You may stay as long as you wish , of course , but if arranging for the care of the girls must take time into account , I think a day or two should be enough to finish our business in '' . To Mark : `` Please give my regards to Myra '' . She signed the letters quickly , stamped them , and placed them on the hall table for Raphael to mail in town . Then she went back to the wicker chair and resolutely adjusted her eyes to the glare on the water . `` My nephews will be coming down '' , she said that evening as Angelina brought her dinner into the dining room , the whole meal on a vast linen-covered tray . She looked at the girl speculatively from eyes which had paled with the years ; ; from the early evening lights of them which had first startled Izaak to look at her in an uncousinly way , they had faded to a near-absence of color which had , possibly from her constant looking at the water , something of the light of the sea in them . Angelina placed the tray on the table and with a flick of dark wrist drew off the cloth . She smiled , and the teeth gleamed in her beautifully modeled olive face . `` That will be so nice for you , Mrs. Packard '' , she said . Her voice was ripe and full and her teeth flashed again in Sicilian brilliance before the warm curved lips met and her mouth settled in repose . `` Um '' , said the old lady , and brought her eyes down to the tray . `` You remember them , I suppose '' ? ? She glinted suspiciously at the dish before her : `` blowfish . I hope Raphael bought them whole '' . Angelina stepped back , her eyes roaming the tray for omissions . Then she looked at the old woman again , her eyes calm . `` Yes '' , she said , `` I remember that they came here every summer . I used to play with the older one sometimes , when he'd let me . Abel '' ? ? The name fell with lazy affectionate remembrance from her lips . For an instant the old aunt felt something indefinable flash through her smile . She would have said triumph . Then Angelina turned and with an easy grace walked toward the kitchen . Jessica Packard lifted her head and followed the retreating figure , her eyes resting nearly closed on the unself-conscious rise and fall of the rounded hips . For a moment she held her face to the empty doorway ; ; then she snorted and groped for her fork . There's no greater catastrophe in the universe , she reflected dourly , impaling tender green beans on the silver fork , than the dwindling away of a family . Procreation , expansion , proliferation -- these are the laws of living things , with the penalty for not obeying them the ultimate in punishments : oblivion . When the fate of the individual is visited on the group , then ( the warm sweet butter dripped from her raised trembling fork and she pushed her head forward belligerently ) , ah , then the true bitterness of existence could be tasted . And indeed the young garden beans were brackish in her mouth . She was the last living of the older generation . What had once been a widespread family -- at one time , she knew , there were enough Packards to populate an entire county -- had now narrowed down to the two boys , Abel and Mark . She swung her eyes up to the blue of the window , her jaws gently mashing the bitter beans . What hope lay in the nephews , she asked the intensifying light out there , with one married to a barren woman and the other divorced , having sired two girl children , with none to bear on the Packard name ? ? She ate . It seemed to her , as it seemed each night , that the gloom drew itself in and became densest at the table's empty chairs , giving her the frequent illusion that she dined with shadows . Here , too , she talked low , quirking her head at one or another of the places , most often at Izaak's armchair which faced her across the long table . Or it might have been the absent nephews she addressed , consciously playing with the notion that this was one of the summers of their early years . She thought again of her children , those two who had died young , before the later science which might have saved them could attach even a label to their separate malignancies . The girl , her first , she barely remembered . It could have been anyone's infant , for it had not survived the bassinet . But the boy the boy had been alive yesterday . Each successive movement in his growing was recorded on the unreeling film inside her . He ran on his plump sticks of legs , freezing now and again into the sudden startled attitudes which the camera had caught and held on the paling photographs , all carefully placed and glued and labeled , resting in the fat plush album in the bottom drawer of the escritoire . In the cruel clearness of her memory the boy remained unchanged , quick with the delight of laughter , and the pain with which she recalled that short destroyed childhood was still unendurable to her . It was one with the desolate rocks and the alien water on those days when she hated the sea . The brothers drove down together in Mark's small red sports car , Mark at the wheel . They rarely spoke . Abel sat and regarded the farm country which , spreading out from both sides of the road , rolled greenly up to where the silent white houses and long barns and silos nested into the tilled fields . He saw the land with a stranger's eyes , all the old familiarness gone . And it presented itself to him as it would to any stranger , impervious , complete in itself . There was stability there , too -- a color which his life had had once . That is what childhood is , he told himself . Solid , settled lost . In the stiff neutral lines of the telephone poles he saw the no-nonsense pen strokes of Aunt Jessica's letter . What bad grace , what incredible selfishness he and Mark had shown . The boyhood summers preceding their uncle's funeral might never have been . They had closed over , absolutely , with the sealing of old Izaak's grave . The small car flew on relentlessly . The old woman , stubbornly reigning in the house above the crashing waters took on an ominous reality . Abel moved and adjusted his long legs . `` I suppose it has to do with the property '' , Mark had said over the telephone when they had discussed their receipt of the letters . Not until the words had been spoken did Abel suddenly see the old house and the insistent sea , and feel his contrition blotted out in one shameful moment of covetousness . He and Mark were the last of the family , and there lay the Cape Ann property which had seemed to have no end , stretching from horizon to horizon , in those golden days of summer . Now Abel turned his head to look at his brother . Mark held the wheel loosely , but his fingers curved around it in a purposeful way and the deliberate set of his body spoke plainly of the figure he'd make in the years to come . His sandy hair was already beginning to thin and recede at the sides , and Abel looked quickly away . Mark easily looked years older than himself , settled , his world comfortably categorized . The vacation traffic was becoming heavier as they approached the sea . `` She didn't mention bringing Myra '' , Mark said , maneuvering the car into the next lane . `` She's probably getting old -- crotchety , I mean -- and we figured uh-uh , better not . They've never met , you know . But Myra wouldn't budge without an express invitation . I feel kind of bad about it '' . He gave Abel a quick glance and moved closer to the wheel , hugging it to him , and Abel caught this briefest of allusions to guilt . `` I imagine the old girl hasn't missed us much '' , Mark added , his eyes on the road . Abel ignored the half-expressed bid for confirmation . He smiled . It was barely possible that his brother was right . He could tell they were approaching the sea . The air took on a special strength now that they'd left the fecund warmth of the farmland behind . There was the smell of the coast , like a primeval memory , composed of equal parts salt water , clams , seaweed and northern air . He turned from the flying trees to look ahead and saw with an inward boy's eye again the great fieldstone house which , built on one of the many acres of ancestral land bordering the west harbor , had been Izaak's bride-gift to his cousin-wife as the last century ended . Mark's thoughts must have been keeping silent pace beside his own , climbing the same crags in dirty white sneakers , clambering out on top of the headland and coming upon the sudden glinting water at the same instant . `` Remember the Starbird ? ? '' Mark asked , and Abel lifted his eyes from the double lines in the middle of the road , the twin white ribbons which the car swallowed rapidly as it ascended the crest of the hill and came down . `` The Starbird , '' Abel said . There was the day Uncle Izaak had , in an unexpected grandiose gesture , handed over the pretty sloop to Abel for keeps , on condition that he never fail to let his brother accompany him whenever younger the boy wished . The two of them had developed into a remarkable sailing team all of this happening in a time of their lives when their youth and their brotherhood knitted them together as no other time or circumstance could . They seemed then to have had a single mind and body , a mutuality which had been accepted with the fact of their youth , casually . He saw the Starbird as she lay , her slender mast up and gently turning , its point describing constant languid circles against a cumulus sky . Both of them had known the feeling of the small life in her waiting , ready , for the two of them to run up her sails . The Starbird had been long at the bottom of the bay . They came unexpectedly upon the sea . Meeting it without preparation as they did , robbed of anticipation , a common disappointment seized them . They were climbing the hill in the night when the headlights abruptly probed solid blackness , became two parallel luminous tubes which broadened out into a faint mist of light and ended . Mark stopped the car and switched off the lights and they sat looking at the water , which , there being no moon out , at first could be distinguished from the sky only by an absence of stars . His eyes were old and they never saw well , but heated with whisky they'd glare at my noise , growing red and raising up his rage . I decided I hated the Pedersen kid too , dying in our kitchen while I was away where I couldn't watch , dying just to entertain Hans and making me go up snapping steps and down a drafty hall , Pa lumped under the covers at the end like dung covered with snow , snoring and whistling . Oh he'd not care about the Pedersen kid . He'd not care about getting waked so he could give up some of his whisky to a slit of a kid and maybe lose one of his hiding places in the bargain . That would make him mad enough if he was sober . I didn't hurry though it was cold and the Pedersen kid was in the kitchen . He was all shoveled up like I thought he'd be . I pushed at his shoulder , calling his name . I think his name stopped the snoring but he didn't move except to roll a little when I shoved him . The covers slid down his skinny neck so I saw his head , fuzzed like a dandelion gone to seed , but his face was turned to the wall -- there was the pale shadow of his nose on the plaster -- and I thought , Well you don't look much like a pig-drunk bully now . I couldn't be sure he was still asleep . He was a cagey sonofabitch . I shook him a little harder and made some noise . `` Pap-pap-pap-hey '' , I said . I was leaning too far over . I knew better . He always slept close to the wall so you had to lean to reach him . Oh he was smart . It put you off . I knew better but I was thinking of the Pedersen kid mother-naked in all that dough . When his arm came up I ducked away but it caught me on the side of the neck , watering my eyes , and I backed off to cough . Pa was on his side , looking at me , his eyes winking , the hand that had hit me a fist in the pillow . `` Get the hell out of here '' . I didn't say anything , trying to get my throat clear , but I watched him . He was like a mean horse to come at from the rear . It was better , though , he'd hit me . He was bitter when he missed . `` Get the hell out of here '' . `` Big Hans sent me . He told me to wake you '' . `` A fat hell on Big Hans . Get out of here '' . `` He found the Pedersen kid by the crib '' . `` Get the hell out '' . Pa pulled at the covers . He was tasting his mouth . `` The kid's froze good . Hans is rubbing him with snow . He's got him in the kitchen '' . `` Pedersen '' ? ? `` No , Pa . It's the Pedersen kid . The kid '' . `` Nothing to steal from the crib '' . `` Not stealing , Pa . He was just lying there . Hans found him froze . That's where he was when Hans found him '' . Pa laughed . `` I ain't hid nothing in the crib '' . `` You don't understand , Pa . The Pedersen kid . The kid '' -- `` I goddamn well understand '' . Pa had his head up , glaring , his teeth gnawing at the place where he'd grown a mustache once . `` I goddamn well understand . You know I don't want to see Pedersen . That cock . Why should I ? ? What did he come for , hey ? ? God dammit , get . And don't come back . Find out something . You're a fool . Both you and Hans . Pedersen . That cock . Don't come back . Out . Out '' . He was shouting and breathing hard and closing his fist on the pillow . He had long black hairs on his wrist . They curled around the cuff of his nightshirt . `` Big Hans made me come . Big Hans said '' -- `` A fat hell on Big Hans . He's an even bigger fool than you are . Fat , hey ? ? I taught him , dammit , and I'll teach you . Out . You want me to drop my pot '' ? ? He was about to get up so I got out , slamming the door . He was beginning to see he was too mad to sleep . Then he threw things . Once he went after Hans and dumped his pot over the banister . Pa'd been shit-sick in that pot . Hans got an axe . He didn't even bother to wipe himself off and he chopped part of Pa's door down before he stopped . He might not have gone that far if Pa hadn't been locked in laughing fit to shake the house . That pot put Pa in an awful good humor whenever he thought of it . I always felt the memory was present in both of them , stirring in their chests like a laugh or a growl , as eager as an animal to be out . I heard Pa cursing all the way downstairs . Hans had laid steaming towels over the kid's chest and stomach . He was rubbing snow on the kid's legs and feet . Water from the snow and water from the towels had run off the kid to the table where the dough was , and the dough was turning pasty , sticking to the kid's back and behind . `` Ain't he going to wake up '' ? ? `` What about your pa '' ? ? `` He was awake when I left '' . `` What'd he say ? ? Did you get the whisky '' ? ? `` He said a fat hell on Big Hans '' . `` Don't be smart . Did you ask him about the whisky '' ? ? `` Yeah '' . `` Well '' ? ? `` He said a fat hell on Big Hans '' . `` Don't be smart . What's he going to do '' ? ? `` Go back to sleep most likely '' . `` You'd best get that whisky '' . `` You go . Take the axe . Pa's scared to hell of axes '' . `` Listen to me , Jorge , I've had enough to your sassing . This kid's froze bad . If I don't get some whisky down him he might die . You want the kid to die ? ? Do you ? ? Well , get your pa and get that whisky '' . `` Pa don't care about the kid '' . `` Jorge '' . `` Well he don't . He don't care at all , and I don't care to get my head busted neither . He don't care , and I don't care to have his shit flung on me . He don't care about anybody . All he cares about is his whisky and that dry crack in his face . Get pig-drunk -- that's what he wants . He don't care about nothing else at all . Nothing . Not Pedersen's kid neither . That cock . Not the kid neither '' . `` I'll get the spirits '' , Ma said . I'd wound Big Hans up tight . I was ready to jump but when Ma said she'd get the whisky it surprised him like it surprised me , and he ran down . Ma never went near the old man when he was sleeping it off . Not any more . Not for years . The first thing every morning when she washed her face she could see the scar on her chin where he'd cut her with a boot cleat , and maybe she saw him heaving it again , the dirty sock popping out as it flew . It should have been nearly as easy for her to remember that as it was for Big Hans to remember going after the axe while he was still spattered with Pa's yellow sick insides . `` No you won't '' , Big Hans said . `` Yes , Hans , if they're needed '' , Ma said . Hans shook his head but neither of us tried to stop her . If we had , then one of us would have had to go instead . Hans rubbed the kid with more snow rubbed rubbed . `` I'll get more snow '' , I said . I took the pail and shovel and went out on the porch . I don't know where Ma went . I thought she'd gone upstairs and expected to hear she had . She had surprised Hans like she had surprised me when she said she'd go , and then she surprised him again when she came back so quick like she must have , because when I came in with the snow she was there with a bottle with three white feathers on its label and Hans was holding it angrily by the throat . Oh , he was being queer and careful , pawing about in the drawer and holding the bottle like a snake at the length of his arm . He was awful angry because he'd thought Ma was going to do something big , something heroic even , especially for her I know him I know him we felt the same sometimes while Ma wasn't thinking about that at all , not anything like that . There was no way of getting even . It wasn't like getting cheated at the fair . They were always trying so you got to expect it . Now Hans had given Ma something of his -- we both had when we thought she was going straight to Pa -- something valuable ; ; but since she didn't know we'd given it to her , there was no easy way of getting it back . Hans cut the foil off finally and unscrewed the cap . He was put out too because there was only one way of understanding what she'd done . Ma had found one of Pa's hiding places . She'd found one and she hadn't said a word while Big Hans and I had hunted and hunted as we always did all winter , every winter since the spring that Hans had come and I had looked in the privy and found the first one . Pa had a knack for hiding . He knew we were looking and he enjoyed it . But now Ma . She'd found it by luck most likely but she hadn't said anything and we didn't know how long ago it'd been or how many other ones she'd found , saying nothing . Pa was sure to find out . Sometimes he didn't seem to because he hid them so well he couldn't find them himself or because he looked and didn't find anything and figured he hadn't hid one after all or had drunk it up . But he'd find out about this one because we were using it . A fool could see what was going on . If he found out Ma found it -- that'd be bad . He took pride in his hiding . It was all the pride he had . I guess fooling Hans and me took doing . But he didn't figure Ma for much . He didn't figure her at all , and if he found out a woman it'd be bad . Hans poured some in a tumbler . `` You going to put more towels on him '' ? ? `` No '' . `` Why not ? ? That's what he needs , something warm to his skin , don't he '' ? ? `` Not where he's froze good . Heat's bad for frostbite . That's why I only put towels on his chest and belly . He's got to thaw slow . You ought to know that '' . Colors on the towels had run . Ma poked her toe in the kid's clothes . `` What are we going to do with these '' ? ? Big Hans began pouring whisky in the kid's mouth but his mouth filled without any getting down his throat and in a second it was dripping from his chin . `` Here , help me prop him up . I got hold his mouth open '' . I didn't want to touch him and I hoped Ma would do it but she kept looking at the kid's clothes piled on the floor and the pool of water by them and didn't make any move to . `` Come on , Jorge '' . `` All right '' . `` Lift , don't shove lift '' . `` O.K. , I'm lifting '' . I took him by the shoulders . His head flopped back . His mouth fell open . The skin on his neck was tight . He was cold all right . `` Hold his head up . He'll choke '' . `` His mouth is open '' . `` His throat's shut . He'll choke '' . `` He'll choke anyway '' . `` Hold his head up '' . `` I can't '' . `` Don't hold him like that . Put your arms around him '' . `` Well Jesus '' . He was cold all right . I put my arm carefully around him . Hans had his fingers in the kid's mouth . `` Now he'll choke for sure '' . `` Shut up . Just hold him like I told you '' . He was cold all right , and wet . I had my arm behind his back . He was in his mid-fifties at this time , long past the establishment of his name and the wish to be lionized yet once again , and it was almost a decade since he had sworn off lecturing . There was never a doubt any more how his structures would be received ; ; it was always the same unqualified success now . He could no longer build anything , whether a private residence in his Pennsylvania county or a church in Brazil , without it being obvious that he had done it , and while here and there he was taken to task for again developing the same airy technique , they were such fanciful and sometimes even playful buildings that the public felt assured by its sense of recognition after a time , a quality of authentic uniqueness about them , which , once established by an artist as his private vision , is no longer disputable as to its other values . Stowey Rummel was internationally famous , a crafter of a genuine Americana in foreign eyes , an original designer whose inventive childishness with steel and concrete was made even more believably sincere by his personality . He had lived for almost thirty years in this same stone farmhouse with the same wife , a remarkably childish thing in itself ; ; he rose at half-past six every morning , made himself some French coffee , had his corn flakes and more coffee , smoked four cigarettes while reading last Sunday's Herald Tribune and yesterday's Pittsburgh Gazette , then put on his high-topped farmer's shoes and walked under a vine bower to his workshop . This was an enormously long building whose walls were made of rocks , some of them brought home from every continent during his six years as an oil geologist . The debris of his other careers was piled everywhere ; ; a pile of wire cages for mice from his time as a geneticist and a microscope lying on its side on the window sill , vertical steel columns wired for support to the open ceiling beams with spidery steel cantilevers jutting out into the air , masonry constructions on the floor from the time he was inventing his disastrous fireplace whose smoke would pass through a whole house , visible all the way up through wire gratings on each floor . His files , desk , drafting board and a high stool formed the only clean island in the chaos . Everywhere else his ideas lay or hung in visible form : his models , drawings , ten-foot canvases in monochromes from his painting days , and underfoot a windfall of broken-backed books that looked as though their insides had been ransacked by a maniac . Bicycle gear-sets he had once used as the basis of the design for the Camden Cycly Company plant hung on a rope in one corner , and over his desk , next to several old and dusty hats , was a clean pair of roller skates which he occasionally used up and down in front of his house . He worked standing , with his left hand in his pocket as though he were merely stopping for a moment , sketching with the surprised stare of one who was watching another person's hand . Sometimes he would grunt softly to some invisible onlooker beside him , sometimes he would look stern and moralistic as his pencil did what he disapproved . It all seemed -- if one could have peeked in at him through one of his windows -- as though this broken-nosed man with the muscular arms and wrestler's neck was merely the caretaker trying his hand at the boss's work . This air of disengagement carried over to his apparent attitude toward his things , and people often mistook it for boredom in him or a surrender to repetitious routine . But he was not bored at all ; ; he had found his style quite early in his career and he thought it quite wonderful that the world admired it , and he could not imagine why he should alter it . There are , after all , fortunate souls who hear everything , but only know how to listen to what is good for them , and Stowey was , as things go , a fortunate man . He left his home the day after New Year's wearing a mackinaw and sheepskin mittens and without a hat . He would wear this same costume in Florida , despite his wife Cleota's reminders over the past five days that he must take some cool clothes with him . But he was too busy to hear what she was saying . So they parted when she was in an impatient humor . When he was bent over behind the wheel of the station wagon , feeling in his trouser cuffs for the ignition key which he had dropped a moment before , she came out of the house with an enormous Rumanian shawl over her head , which she had bought in that country during one of their trips abroad , and handed him a clean handkerchief through the window . Finding the key under his shoe , he started the engine , and while it warmed up he turned to her standing there in the dripping fog , and said , `` Defrost the refrigerator '' . He saw the surprise in her face , and laughed as though it were the funniest expression he had ever seen . He kept on laughing until she started laughing with him . He had a deep voice which was full of good food she had cooked , and good humor ; ; an explosive laugh which always carried everything before it . He would settle himself into his seat to laugh . Whenever he laughed it was all he was doing . And she was made to fall in love with him again there in the rutted dirt driveway standing in the cold fog , mad as she was at his going away when he really didn't have to , mad at their both having got older in a life that seemed to have taken no more than a week to go by . She was forty-nine at this time , a lanky woman of breeding with an austere , narrow face which had the distinction of a steeple or some architecture that had been designed long ago for a stubborn sort of prayer . Her eyebrows were definite and heavy and formed two lines moving upward toward a high forehead and a great head of brown hair that fell to her shoulders . There was an air of blindness in her gray eyes , the startled-horse look that ultimately comes to some women who are born at the end of an ancestral line long since divorced from money-making and which , besides , has kept its estate intact . She was personally sloppy , and when she had colds would blow her nose in the same handkerchief all day and keep it , soaking wet , dangling from her waist , and when she gardened she would eat dinner with dirt on her calves . But just when she seemed to have sunk into some depravity of peasanthood she would disappear and come down bathed , brushed , and taking breaths of air , and even with her broken nails her hands would come to rest on a table or a leaf with a thoughtless delicacy , a grace of history , so to speak , and for an instant one saw how ferociously proud she was and adamant on certain questions of personal value . She even spoke differently when she was clean , and she was clean now for his departure and her voice clear and rather sharp . `` Now drive carefully , for God's sake '' ! ! She called , trying to attain a half humorous resentment at his departure . But he did not notice , and was already backing the car down to the road , saying `` Toot-toot '' ! ! To the stump of a tree as he passed it , the same stump which had impaled the car of many a guest in the past thirty years and which he refused to have removed . She stood clutching her shawl around her shoulders until he had swung the car onto the road . Then , when he had it pointed down the hill , he stopped to gaze at her through the window . She had begun to turn back toward the house , but his look caught her and she stood still , waiting there for what his expression indicated would be a serious word of farewell . He looked at her out of himself , she thought , as he did only for an instant at a time , the look which always surprised her even now when his uncombable hair was yellowing a little and his breath came hard through his nicotine-choked lungs , the look of the gaunt youth she had suddenly found herself staring at in the Tate Gallery on a Thursday once . Now she kept herself protectively ready to laugh again and sure enough he pointed at her with his index finger and said `` Toot '' ! ! Once more and roared off into the fog , his foot evidently surprising him with the suddenness with which it pressed the accelerator , just as his hand did when he worked . She walked back to the house and entered , feeling herself returning , sensing some kind of opportunity in the empty building . There is a death in all partings , she knew , and promptly put it out of her mind . She enjoyed great parties when she would sit up talking and dancing and drinking all night , but it always seemed to her that being alone , especially alone in her house , was the realest part of life . Now she could let out the three parakeets without fear they would be stepped on or that Stowey would let them out one of the doors ; ; she could dust the plants , then break off suddenly and pick up an old novel and read from the middle on ; ; improvise cha-chas on the harp ; ; and finally , the best part of all , simply sit at the plank table in the kitchen with a bottle of wine and the newspapers , reading the ads as well as the news , registering nothing on her mind but letting her soul suspend itself above all wishing and desire . She did this now , comfortably aware of the mist running down the windows , of the silence outside , of the dark afternoon it was getting to be . She fell asleep leaning on her hand , hearing the house creaking as though it were a living a private life of its own these two hundred years , hearing the birds rustling in their cages and the occasional whirring of wings as one of them landed on the table and walked across the newspaper to perch in the crook of her arm . Every few minutes she would awaken for a moment to review things : Stowey , yes , was on his way south , and the two boys were away in school , and nothing was burning on the stove , and Lucretia was coming for dinner and bringing three guests of hers . Then she fell asleep again as soddenly as a person with fever , and when she awoke it was dark outside and the clarity was back in her eyes . She stood up , smoothing her hair down , straightening her clothes , feeling a thankfulness for the enveloping darkness outside , and , above everything else , for the absence of the need to answer , to respond , to be aware even of Stowey coming in or going out , and yet , now that she was beginning to cook , she glimpsed a future without him , a future alone like this , and the pain made her head writhe , and in a moment she found it hard to wait for Lucretia to come with her guests . She went into the living room and turned on three lamps , then back into the kitchen where she turned on the ceiling light and the switch that lit the floods on the barn , illuminating the driveway . She knew she was feeling afraid and inwardly laughed at herself . They were both so young , after all , so unready for any final parting . How could it have been thirty years already , she wondered ? ? But yes , nineteen plus thirty was forty-nine , and she was forty-nine and she had been married at nineteen . She stood still over the leg of lamb , rubbing herbs into it , quite suddenly conscious of a nausea in her stomach and a feeling of wrath , a sensation of violence that started her shivering . But they all said , `` No , your time will come . Enjoy being a bride while you can '' . There was no room for company in the tiny Weaning House ( where the Albright boys always took their brides , till they could get a house and a farm of their own ) . So when the Big House filled up and ran over , the sisters-in-law found beds for everyone in their own homes . And there was still not anything that Linda Kay could do . So Linda Kay gave up asking , and accepted her reprieve . Without saying so , she was really grateful ; ; for to attend the dying was something she had never experienced , and certainly had not imagined when she thought of the duties she would have as Bobby Joe's wife . She had made curtains for all the windows of her little house , and she had kept it spotless and neat , shabby as it was , and cooked good meals for Bobby Joe . She had done all the things she had promised herself she would do , but she had not thought of this . People died , she would have said , in hospitals , or in cars on the highway at night . Bobby Joe was gone all day now , not coming in for dinner and sometimes not for supper . When they first married he had been working in the fields all day , and she would get in the car and drive to wherever he was working , to take him a fresh hot meal . Now there was no work in the fields , nor would there be till it rained , and she did not know where he went . Not that she complained , or had any cause to . Four or five of the cousins from East Texas were about his age , so naturally they ran around together . There was no reason for her to ask what they did . Thus a new pattern of days began to develop , for Granny Albright did not die . She lay still on the bed , her head hardly denting the pillow ; ; sometimes she opened her eyes and looked around , and sometimes she took a little milk or soup . They stopped expecting her to die the next minute , but only in the next day or two . Those who had driven hundreds of miles for the burial would not go home , for she might die any time ; ; but they might as well unpack their suitcases , for she might linger on . So the pattern was established . When Linda Kay had put up her breakfast dishes and mopped her linoleum rugs , she would go to the Big House . There was not anything she could do there , but that was where everyone was , or would be . Bobby Joe and the boys would come by , say `` How's Granny '' ? ? And sit on the porch a while . The older men would be there at noon , and maybe rest for a time before they took their guns off to the creek or drove down the road towards town . The women and children stayed at the Albrights' . The women , keeping their voices low as they worked around the house or sat in the living room , sounded like chickens shut up in a coop for the night . The children had to play away from the house ( in the barn loft or the pasture behind the barn ) , to maintain a proper quietness . Off and on , all day , someone would be wiping at the powdery gray dust that settled over everything . The evaporative cooler had been moved to Granny's room , and her door was kept shut ; ; so that the rest of the house stayed open , though there was a question as to whether it was hotter or cooler that way . The dust clogged their throats , and the heat parched them , so that the women were always making ice water . They had cleaned up an old ice box and begun to buy fifty-pound blocks of ice in town , as the electric refrigerator came nowhere near providing enough ice for the crowds who ate and drank there . One afternoon , as the women sat clucking softly , a new carload of people pulled up at the gate . It was a Cadillac , black grayed with the dust of the road , its windows closed tight so you knew that the people who climbed out of it would be cool and unwrinkled . They were an old fat couple ( as Linda Kay described them to herself ) , a thick middle-aged man , and a girl about ten or twelve . There was much embracing , much exclaiming . `` Cousin Ada ! ! Cousin John '' ! ! `` Cousin Lura '' ! ! `` Cousin Howard '' ! ! `` And how is she '' ? ? `` About the same , John , about the same '' . All the women got up and offered their chairs , and when they were all seated again , the guests made their inquiries and their explanations . `` We were on our vacation in Canada '' , Howard explained , in a muffled voice that must have been used to booming , `` and the news didn't catch up with us till we were nearly home . We came on as soon as we could '' . There was the suggestion of ice water , and -- in spite of the protest `` We're not really thirsty '' -- Linda Kay , to escape the stuffy air and the smothering soft voices , hurried to the kitchen . She filled a big pitcher and set it , with glasses , on a tray . Carrying it to the living room , she imagined the picture she made : tall and roundly slim , a bit sophisticated in her yellow sheath , with a graceful swingy walk that she had learned as a twirler with the school band . Almost immediately she was ashamed of herself for feeling vain , at such a time , in such a place , and she tossed back her long yellow hair , smiling shyly as she entered the room . Howard ( the thick middle-aged man ) was looking at her . She felt the look and looked back because she could not help it , seeing that he was neither as old nor as thick as she had at first believed . `` And who is this '' ? ? He asked , when she passed him a glass . `` Oh that's Linda Kay '' , Mama Albright said fondly . `` She married our baby boy , Bobby Joe , this summer '' . `` Let's see '' , Cousin Ada said . `` He's a right smart younger than the rest '' ? ? `` Oh yes '' , Mama laughed . `` He's ten years younger than Ernest . We didn't expect him to come along ; ; thought for the longest he was a tumor '' . This joke was not funny to Linda Kay , and she blushed , as she always did ; ; then , hearing the muffled boom of Howard's laughter , blushed redder . `` Who is Howard , anyway '' ? ? She asked Bobby Joe that night . `` He makes me uncomfortable '' . `` Oh he's a second cousin or something . He got in the oil business out at Odessa and lucked into some money '' . `` How old is he '' ? ? `` Gosh , I don't know . Thirty-five , I guess . He's been married and got this half-grown kid . If he bothers you , don't pay him any mind . He's just a big windbag '' . Bobby Joe was thinking about something else . `` Say , did you know they're fixing to have a two-day antelope season on the Double J '' ? ? He was talking about antelope again when they woke up . `` Listen , I never had a chance to kill an antelope . There never was a season before , but now they want to thin 'em out on account of the drouth '' . `` Did he ever visit here when he was a kid '' ? ? Linda Kay asked . `` Who '' ? ? `` Howard '' . `` Hell , I don't know . When he was a kid I wasn't around '' . Bobby Joe took a gun from behind the door , and with a quick `` Bye now '' was gone for the day . Almost immediately Howard and his daughter Debora drove up in the Cadillac . `` We're going after ice '' , Howard said , `` and thought maybe you'd go along and keep us company '' . There was really no reason to refuse , and Linda Kay had never ridden in a Cadillac . Driving along the caliche-topped road to town , Howard talked . Finally he said , `` Tell me about yourself '' , and Linda Kay told him , because she thought herself that she had had an interesting life . She was such a well-rounded teenager , having been a twirler , Future Farmers sweetheart , and secretary of Future Homemakers . In her sophomore year she had started going steady with Bobby Joe , who was a football player , Future Homemakers sweetheart , and president of Future Farmers . It was easy to see that they were made for each other , and they knew what they wanted . Bobby Joe would be a senior this year , and he planned to graduate . But there was no need for Linda Kay to go on , since all she wanted in life was to make a home for Bobby Joe and ( blushing ) raise his children . Howard sighed . `` You lucky kids '' , he said . `` I'd give anything if I could have found a girl like you '' . Then he told Linda Kay about himself . Of course he couldn't say much , really , because of Debora , but Linda Kay could imagine what kind of woman his wife had been and what a raw deal he had got . It made her feel different about Howard . She was going to tell Bobby Joe about how mistaken she had been , but he brought one of the cousins home for supper , and all they did was talk about antelope . Bobby Joe was trying to get Linda Kay to say she would cook one if he brought it home . `` Cook a whole antelope '' ? ? She exclaimed . `` Why , I couldn't even cook a piece of antelope steak ; ; I never even saw any '' . `` Oh , you could . I want to roast the whole thing , and have it for the boys '' . Linda Kay told him he couldn't do anything like that with his Grandma dying , and he said well they had to eat , didn't they , they weren't all dying . Linda Kay felt like going off to the bedroom to cry ; ; but they were going up to the Big House after supper , and she had to put on a clean dress and fix her hair a little . Every night they all went to Mama and Papa Albright's , and sat on the open front porch , where they could get the breeze . It was full-of-the-moon ( or a little past ) , and nearly light as day . They all sat around and drank ice water , and the men smoked , and everybody had a good time . Once in a while they said what a shame it was , with Granny dying , but they all agreed she wouldn't have wanted it any other way . That night the older men got to talking about going possum-hunting on a moonlight night . Bobby Joe and two or three of the other boys declared they had never been possum-hunting , and Uncle Bill Farnworth ( from Mama Albright's side of the family ) said he would just get up from there and take them , right then . After they had left , some of the people moved around , to find more comfortable places to sit . There were not many chairs , so that some preferred to sit on the edge of the porch , resting their feet on the ground , and others liked to sit where they could lean back against the wall . Howard , who had been sitting against the wall , said he needed more fresh air , and took the spot on the edge of the porch where Bobby Joe had been sitting . `` You'll be a darn sight more comfortable there , Howard '' , Ernest said , laughing , and they all laughed . Linda Kay felt that she was not exactly more comfortable . Bobby Joe had been sitting close to her , touching her actually , and holding her hand from time to time , but it seemed at once that Howard sat much closer . Perhaps it was just that he had so much more flesh , so that more of it seemed to come in contact with hers ; ; but she had never been so aware of anyone's flesh before . Still she was not sorry he sat by her , but in fact was flattered . He had become the center of the company , such stories he had to tell . He had sold oil stock to Bob Hope and Bing Crosby in person ; ; he had helped fight an oil-well fire that raged six days and nights . `` But tell me , doctor , where do you plan to conduct the hatching '' ? ? Alex asked . `` That will have to be in the hotel '' , the doctor retorted , confirming Alex's anticipations . `` What I want you to do is to go to the market with me early tomorrow morning and help smuggle the hen back into the hotel '' . The doctor paid the bill and they repaired to the hotel , room number nine , to initiate Alex further into these undertakings . The doctor opened the smallest of his cases , an unimposing straw bag , and exposed the contents for Alex's inspection . Inside , carefully packed in straw , were six eggs , but the eye of a poultry psychologist was required to detect what scientifically valuable specimentalia lay inside ; ; to Alex they were merely six not unusual hens' eggs . There was little enough time to contemplate them , however ; ; in an instant the doctor was stalking across the room with an antique ledger in his hands , thoroughly eared and big as a table top . He placed it on Alex's lap . `` This is my hen ledger '' , he informed him in an absorbed way . `` It's been going since 1908 when I was a junior in college . That first entry there is the Vermont Flumenophobe , the earliest and one of the most successful of my eighty-three varieties -- great big scapulars and hardly any primaries at all . Couldn't take them near a river , though , or they'd squawk like a turkey cock the day before Thanksgiving '' . The ledger was full of most precise information : date of laying , length of incubation period , number of chick reaching the first week , second week , fifth week , weight of hen , size of rooster's wattles and so on , all scrawled out in a hand that looked more Chinese than English , the most jagged and sprawling Alex had ever seen . Below these particulars was a series of alpha-beta-gammas connected by arrows and crosses which denoted the lineage of the breed . Alex's instruction was rapid , for the doctor had to go off to the Rue Ecole De Medecine to hear more speeches with only time for one sip of wine to sustain him through them all . But after the doctor's return that night Alex could see , from the high window in his own room , the now familiar figure crouched on a truly impressive heap of towels , apparently giving its egg-hatching powers one final chance before it was replaced in its office by a sure-enough hen . A knocking at Alex's door roused him at six o'clock the following morning . It was the doctor , dressed and ready for the expedition to the market , and Alex was obliged to prepare himself in haste . The doctor stood about , waiting for Alex to dress , with a show of impatience , and soon they were moving , as quietly as could be , through the still-dark hallways , past the bedroom of the patronne , and so into the street . The market was not far and , once there , the doctor's sense of immediacy left him and he fell into a state of harmony with the birds around him . He stroked the hens and they responded with delighted clucks , he gobbled with the turkeys and they at once were all attention , he quacked with the ducks , and cackled with a pair of exceedingly flattered geese . The dawn progressed and it seemed that the doctor would never be done with his ministrations when quite abruptly something broke his revery . It was a fine broody hen , white , with a maternal eye and a striking abundance of feathers in the under region of the abdomen . The doctor , with the air of a man whose professional interests have found scope , drew Alex's attention to those excellences which might otherwise have escaped him : the fine color in comb and wattles , the length and quality of neck and saddle hackles , the firm , wide spread of the toes , and a rare justness in the formation of the ear lappets . All search was ended ; ; he had found his fowl . The purchase was effected and they made their way towards the hotel again , the hen , with whom some sort of communication had been set up , nestling in the doctor's arms . The clocks struck seven-thirty as they approached the hotel entrance ; ; and hopes that the chambermaid and patronne would still be abed began to rise in Alex's well exercised breast . The doctor was wearing a long New England greatcoat , hardly necessary in the June weather but a garment which proved well adapted to the sequestration of hens . Alex entered first and was followed by the doctor who , for all his care , manifested a perceptible bulge on his left side where the hen was cradled . They advanced in a line across the entrance hall to the stairway and up , with gingerly steps , towards the first landing . It was then that they heard the tread of one descending and , in some perturbation glancing up , saw the patronne coming towards them as they gained the landing . `` Bonjour , messieurs , vous etes matinals '' , she greeted them pleasantly . Alex explained that they had been out for a stroll before breakfast while the doctor edged around behind him , attempting to hide the protuberance at his left side behind Alex's arm and back . `` Vous voulez vos petits dejeuners tout de suite alors '' ? ? Their hostess enquired . Alex told her that there was no hurry for their breakfasts , trying at the same time to effect a speedy separation of the persons before and behind him . The doctor , he noticed , was attempting a transverse movement towards the stairs , but before the movement could be completed a distinct and audible cluck ruffled the air in the hollow of the stair-well . Eyes swerved in the patronne's head , Alex coughed loudly , and the doctor , with a sforzando of chicken noises floating behind him , took to the stairs in long-shanked leaps . `` Comment '' ? ? Ejaculated the surprised woman , looking at Alex for an explanation but he , parting from her without ceremony , only offered a few words about the doctor's provincial American speech and a state of nerves brought on by the demands of his work . With that he hurried up the stairs , followed by her suspicious gaze . When Alex entered his room , the doctor was already preparing a nest in the straw case , six eggs ready for the hen's attentions . There was no reference to the incident on the stairs , his powers being absorbed by this more immediate business . The hen appeared to have no doubts as to her duties and was quick to settle down to the performance of them . One part of her audience was totally engaged , the connoisseur witnessing a peculiarly fine performance of some ancient classic , the other part , the guest of the connoisseur , attentive as one who must take an intelligent interest in that which he does not fully understand . The spectacle progressed towards a denouement which was obviously still remote ; ; the audience attended . Time elapsed but the doctor was obviously unconscious of its passage until an unwelcome knock on the door interrupted the processes of nature . Startled , he jumped up to pull hen and case out of view , and Alex went to the door . He opened it a crack and in doing so made as much shuffling , coughing , and scraping noise as possible in order to drown emanations from the hen who had begun to protest . It was Giselle , the fille de chambre , come to clean the room , and while she stood before him with ears pricked up and regard all curiosity , explaining her errand , Alex could see from the corner of his eye the doctor doing all he could to calm the displeased bird . Giselle was reluctant but Alex succeeded in persuading her to come back in five minutes and the door was shut again . `` Who was that , young feller '' ? ? The doctor instantly asked . `` That was the fille de chambre , the one you thought couldn't get the eggs out . She looked mighty interested , though . Anyhow she's coming back in five minutes to do the room '' . The doctor's mind was working at a great speed ; ; he rose to put his greatcoat on and addressed Alex in a muted voice . `` Have you got our keys handy '' ? ? `` Right in my pocket '' . `` All right . Now you go outside and beckon me when it's safe '' . The hall was empty and Alex beckoned ; ; they climbed the stairs which creaked , very loudly to their sensitive ears , and reached the next floor . A guest was locking his room ; ; they passed behind him and got to Alex's room unnoticed . The doctor sat down rather wearily , caressing the hen and remarking that the city was not the place for a poultry-loving man , but no sooner was the remark out than a knock at this door obliged him to cover the hen with his greatcoat once more . At the door Alex managed to persuade the increasingly astonished fille de chambre to return in ten minutes . It was evident that a second transfer had to be effected , and that it had to take place between the time the fille finished the doctor's room and the time she began Alex's . They waited three minutes and then crept out on tip-toe ; ; the halls were empty and they passed down the stairs to number nine and listened at the door . A bustle of sheets being smoothed and pillows being arranged indicated the fille de chambre's presence inside ; ; they listened and suddenly a step towards the door announced another important fact . The doctor shot down to the lavatory and turned the doorknob , but to no effect : the lavatory was occupied . Although a look of alarm passed over his face , he did not arrest his movements but disappeared into the shower room just as the chambermaid emerged from number nine . Alex suppressed those expressions of relief which offered to prevail in his face and escape from his throat ; ; unwarranted they were in any case for , as he stood facing the fille de chambre , his ears were assailed by new sounds from the interior of the shower room . The events of the last quarter of an hour , mysterious to any bird accustomed only to the predictable life of coop and barnyard , had overcome the doctor's hen and she gave out a series of cackly wails , perhaps mourning her nest , but briefly enjoyed . The doctor's wits had not left him , however , for all his sixty-eight years , and the wails were almost immediately lost in the sound of water rushing out from the showerhead . Alex nodded to the maid as though nothing unusual were taking place and entered the doctor's room . Shortly , the doctor himself entered , his hair somewhat wet from the shower , but evidently satisfied with the outcome of their adventures . Without comment he opened the closet and from its shelves constructed a highboard around the egg case which he had placed on the floor inside . Next , the hen was nested and all seemed well . The two men sat for some time , savoring the pleasure of escape from peril and the relief such escape brings , before they got up and left the hotel , the doctor to go to the conference house and Alex to go to the main post office . Alex returned to the hotel , rather weary and with no new prospects of a role , in the late afternoon , but found the doctor in an ebullient mood . At the time Alex arrived he was engaged in some sort of intimate communication with the hen , who had settled herself on the nest most peacefully after the occurrences of the morning . `` Chickens have short memories '' , the doctor remarked , `` that's why they are better company than most people I know '' , and he went on to break some important news to Alex . `` Well '' , he began , `` It seems like some people in Paris want to hear more from me than those fellers over at the conference house do . They've got a big vulture from Tanganika at the zoo here , with a wife for him , too , very rare birds , both of them , the only Vulturidae of their species outside Africa . Seems like she's willing , but the male just flops around all day like the bashful boy who took Jeannie May behind the barn and then didn't know what to do , and the people at the zoo haven't got any vulture chicks to show for their trouble . Going downstairs with the tray , Winston wished he could have given in to Miss Ada , but he knew better than to do what she said when she had that little-girl look . There were times it wasn't right to make a person happy , like the times she came in the kitchen and asked know we don't keep peanut `` butter for a peanut butter sandwich . You in this house '' , he always told her . `` Why , Winston '' , she'd cry , `` I just now saw you eating it out of the jar '' ! ! But he knew how important it was for her to keep her figure . In the kitchen , Leona , his little young wife , was reading the morning paper . Her legs hung down long and thin as she sat on the high stool . `` Here '' , Winston said gently , `` what's these dishes doing not washed '' ? ? The enormous plates which had held Mr. Jack's four fried eggs and five strips of bacon were still stacked in the sink . `` Leave me alone '' , Leona said . `` Can't you see I'm busy '' ? ? She looked at him impudently over the corner of the paper . `` This is moving day '' , Winston reminded her , `` and I bet you left things every which way upstairs , your clothes all over the floor and the bed not made . Leona '' ! ! His eye had fastened on her leg ; ; bending , he touched her knee . `` If I catch you one more time down here without stockings '' -- She twitched her leg away . `` Fuss , fuss , old man '' . She had an alley cat's manners . Winston stacked Miss Ada's thin pink dishes in the sink . Then he spread out the last list on the counter . `` To Be Left Behind '' was printed at the top in Miss Ada ; ; fine hand . Winston took out a pencil , admired the point , and wrote slowly and heavily , `` Clothes Stand '' . Sighing , Leona dropped the paper and stood up . `` I guess I better get ready to go '' . Winston watched her fumbling to untie her apron . `` Here '' . Carefully , he undid the bow . `` How come your bows is always cockeyed '' ? ? She turned and put her arms around his neck . `` I don't want to leave here , Winston '' . `` Now listen to that '' . He drew back , embarrassed and pleased . `` I thought you was sick to death of this big house . Said you wore yourself out , cleaning all these empty rooms '' . `` At least there is room here '' , she said . `` What room is there going to be in an apartment for any child '' ? ? `` I told you what Miss Ada's doctor said '' . `` I don't mean Miss Ada ! ! What you think I care about that ? ? I mean our children '' . She sounded as though they already existed . In spite of the hundred things he had on his mind , Winston went and put his arm around her waist . `` We've got plenty of time to think about that . All the time in the world . We've only been married four years , January '' . `` Four years '' ! ! She wailed . `` That's a long time , waiting '' . `` How many times have I told you '' -- he began , and was almost glad when she cut him off -- `` Too many times '' ! ! -- and flounced to the sink , where she began noisily to wash her hands . Too many times was the truth of it , Winston thought . He hardly believed his reason himself any more . Although it had seemed a good reason , to begin with : no couple could afford to have children . `` How you going to work with a child hanging on you '' ? ? He asked Leona . `` You want to keep this job , don't you '' ? ? He doubted whether she heard him , over the running water . He sat for a while with his hands on his knees , watching the bend of her back as she gathered up her things -- a comb , a bottle of aspirin -- to take upstairs and pack . She made him sad some days , and he was never sure why ; ; it was something to do with her back , the thinness of it , and the quick , jerky way she bent . She was too young , that was all ; ; too young and thin and straight . `` Winston '' ! ! It was Mr. Jack , bellowing out in the hall . Winston hurried through the swinging door . `` I've been bursting my lungs for you '' , Mr. Jack complained . He was standing in front of the mirror , tightening his tie . He had on his gray tweed overcoat and his city hat , and his brief case lay on the bench . `` I don't know what you think you've been doing about my clothes '' , he said . `` This coat looks like a rag heap '' . There were a few blades of lint on the shoulder . Winston took the clothesbrush out of the closet and went to work . He gave Mr. Jack a real going-over ; ; he brushed his shoulders and his back and his collar with long , firm strokes . `` Hey '' ! ! Mr. Jack cried when the brush tipped his hat down over his eyes . Winston apologized and quickly set the hat right . Then he stood back to look at Mr. Jack , who was pulling on his pigskin gloves . Winston enjoyed seeing him start out ; ; he wore his clothes with style . When he was going to town , nothing was good enough -- he had cursed at Winston once for leaving a fleck of polish on his shoelace . At home , he wouldn't even wash his hands for supper , and he wandered around the yard in a pair of sweaty old corduroys . The velvet smoking jackets , pearl-gray , wine , and blue , which Miss Ada had bought him hung brushed and unworn in the closet . `` Good-by , Winston '' , Mr. Jack said , giving a final set to his hat . `` Look out for those movers '' ! ! Winston watched him hurry down the drive to his car ; ; a handsome , fine-looking man it made him proud to see . After Mr. Jack drove away , Winston went on looking out the window . He noticed a speck of dirt on the sill and swiped at it with his finger . Then he looked at his finger , at the wrinkled , heavy knuckle and the thick nail he used like a knife to pry up , slit , and open . For the first time , he be sad about the move . That house was ten years off his life let himself . Each brass handle and hinge shone for his reward , and he knew how to get at the dust in the china flowers and how to take down the long glass drops which hung from the chandelier . He knew the house like a blind man , through his fingers , and he did not like to think of all the time and rags and polishes he had spent on keeping it up . Ten years ago , he had come to the house to be interviewed . The tulips and the big pink peonies had been blooming along the drive , and he had walked up from the bus almost singing . Miss Ada had been out back , in a straw hat , planting flowers . She had talked to him right there , with the hot sun in his face , which made him sweat and feel ashamed . Winston had been surprised at her for that . Still , he had liked the way she had looked , in a fresh , neat cotton dress -- citron yellow , if he remembered . She had had a dignity about her , even barefoot and almost too tan . Since then , the flowers she had planted had spread all over the hill . Already the jonquils were blooming in a flock by the front gate , and the periwinkles were coming on , blue by the porch steps . In a week the hyacinths would spike out . And the dogwood in early May , for Miss Ada's alfresco party ; ; and after that the Japanese cherries . Now the yard looked wet and bald , the trees bare under their buds , but in a while Miss Ada's flowers would bloom like a marching parade . She had dug a hole for each bulb , each tree wore a tag with her writing on it ; ; where would she go for her gardening now ? ? Somehow Winston didn't think she'd take to window boxes . Sighing , he hurried to the living room . He had a thousand things to see to . Still , he couldn't help thinking , we're all getting old , getting small ; ; the snail is pulling in her horns . In the living room , Miss Ada was standing by the window with a sheaf of lists in her hand . She was looking out at the garden . `` Winston '' , she said , `` get the basket for the breakables '' . Winston had the big straw basket ready in the hall . He brought it in and put it down beside her . Miss Ada was looking fine ; ; she had on her Easter suit , blue , with lavender binding . Halfway across the house , he could have smelled her morning perfume . It hung in all her day clothes , sweet and strong ; ; sometimes when he was pressing , Winston raised her dresses to his face . Frowning , Miss Ada studied the list . `` Well , let's see . The china lemon tree . The alabaster cockatoo '' . Winston followed her around the room , collecting the small frail objects ( Christmas , birthday , and anniversary ) and wrapping them in tissue paper . Neither of them trusted the movers . When they came to Mr. Jack's photograph , twenty by twelve inches in a curly silver frame , Miss Ada said , `` By rights I ought to leave that , seeing he won't take my clotheshorse '' . She smiled at Winston , and he saw the hateful hard glitter in her eyes . He picked up the photograph and began to wrap it . `` At least you could leave it for the movers '' , Miss Ada said . `` What possessed you to tell me a clotheshorse would be a good idea '' ? ? Winston folded the tissue paper carefully . `` He's used it every day ; ; every morning , I lay out his clothes on it '' . `` Well , that's over now . And it was his main present ! ! Leave that fool picture out '' , she added sharply . Winston laid it in the basket . `` Mr. Jack sets store by that '' . `` Really , Winston . It was meant to be my present '' . But she went on down the list . Winston was relieved ; ; those presents had been on his mind . He had only agreed with Miss Ada about getting the valet , but he had actually suggested the photograph to Mr. Jack . `` You know what she likes , Winston '' , he had said wearily , one evening in November when Winston was pulling off his overshoes . `` Tell me what to get her for Christmas '' . `` She's been talking about a picture '' , Winston had told him . `` Picture ! ! You mean picture of me '' ? ? But Winston had persuaded him . On Christmas night , they had had a disagreement about it . Winston had heard because he was setting up the liquor tray in the next room . Through the door , he had seen Mr. Jack walking around , waiting for Miss Ada . Finally she had come down ; ; Winston had heard her shaking out the skirt of her new pink silk hostess gown . `` How do you like it '' ? ? She had asked . Mr. Jack had said , `` You look about fifteen years old '' . `` Is that a compliment '' ? ? `` I don't know '' . He had stood at a little distance , studying her , as though he would walk around next and look at the back of her head . `` Lovie , you make me feel naked '' . Miss Ada had giggled , and she went sweeping and rustling to the couch and sank down . `` You look like that picture I have at the office '' , Mr. Jack had started . `` Not a line , not a wrinkle . I look like an old man , compared '' , and he had picked up his photograph with the red Christmas bow still on it . `` Look , an old man . Will you wear pink when you're sixty '' ? ? `` Darling , I love that photograph . I'm going to put it on my dresser '' . `` I guess it's children make a woman old . A man gets old anyhow '' . After a minute he went on , `` People must think the curse is on me , seeing you fresh as an apple and me old and gray '' . `` I'll give you a medical certificate , framed , if you like '' , Miss Ada had said . `` No . All I want is a picture -- with a few lines . Make the man put them in if he has to '' . After that they had sat for five minutes without saying a word . Then Miss Ada had stood up , rustling and rustling , and gone upstairs . Was it love ? ? I had no doubt that it was . During the rest of the summer my scholarly mania for making plaster casts and spatter prints of Catskill flowers and leaves was all but surpassed by the constantly renewed impressions of Jessica that my mind served up to me for contemplation and delight . Nothing in all the preceding years had had the power to bring me closer to a knowledge of profound sorrow than the breakup of camp , the packing away of my camp uniforms , the severing of ties with the six or ten people I had grown most to love in the world . In final separation from them , in the railroad terminal across the river from New York , I would nearly cry . My parents' welcoming arms would seem woeful , inadequate , unwanted . But that year was different , for just as the city , in the form of my street clothes , had intruded upon my mountain nights , so an essential part of the summer gave promise of continuing into the fall : Jessica and I , about to be separated not by a mere footbridge or messhall kitchen but by the immense obstacle of residing in cruelly distant boroughs , had agreed to correspond . These letters became the center of my existence . I lived to see an envelope of hers in the morning mail and to lock myself in my room in the afternoon to reread her letter for the tenth time and finally prepare an answer . My memory has catalogued for easy reference and withdrawal the image of her pink , scented stationery and the unsloped , almost printed configurations of her neat , studious handwriting with which she invited me to recall our summer , so many sentences beginning with `` Remember when ; ; '' and others concerning camp friends who resided in her suburban neighborhood , , and news of her commencing again her piano lessons , her private school , a visit to Boston to see her grandparents and an uncle who was a surgeon returned on furlough , wounded , from the war in Europe . In my letters I took on a personality that differed from the self I knew in real life . Then epistolatory me was a foreign correspondent dispatching exciting cables and communiques , full of dash and wit and glamor , quoting from the books I read , imitating the grand styles of the authors recommended by a teacher in whose special , after-school class I was enrolled . The letters took their source from a stream of my imagination in which I was transformed into a young man not unlike my bunkmate Eliot Sands -- he of the porch steps anecdotes -- who smoked cigarettes , performed the tango , wore fifty dollar suits , and sneaked off into the dark with girls to do unimaginable things with them . Like Eliot , in my fantasies , I had a proud bearing and , with a skill that was vaguely continental , I would lead Jessica through an evening of dancing and handsome descriptions of my newest exploits , would guide her gently to the night's climax which , in my dreams , was always represented by our almost suffocating one another to death with deep , moist kisses burning with love . The night after reading her letter about her surgeon uncle -- it must have been late in September -- I had a vision of myself returned in ragged uniform from The Front , nearly dying , my head bandaged and blooded , and Jessica bending over me , the power of her love bringing me back to life . For many nights afterward , the idea of her having been so close to me in that imagined bed would return and fill me with obscure and painful desires , would cause me to lie awake in shame , tossing with irresolution , longing to fall into a deep sleep . The weeks went by , and the longer our separation grew , the more unbounded and almost unbearable my fantasies became . They caused my love for Jessica to become warmer and at the same time more hopeless , as if my adolescent self knew that only torment would ever bring me the courage to ask to see her again . As it turned out , Jessica took matters into her own hands . Having received permission to give a camp reunion-Halloween party , she asked that I come and be her date . I went and , mum and nervous , all but made a fool of myself . Again among those jubilantly reunited bunkmates , I was shy with Jessie and acted as I had during those early Saturday mornings when we all seemed to be playing for effect , to be detached and unconcerned with the girls who were properly our dates but about whom , later , in the privacy of our bunks , we would think in terms of the most elaborate romance . I remember standing in a corner , watching Jessica act the hostess , serving soft drinks to her guests . She was wearing her dark hair in two , thick braids to attain an `` American Girl '' effect she thought was appropriate to Halloween . It made her look sweet and schoolgirlish , I was excited to be with her , but I did not know how to express it . Yet a moment did come that night when the adventurous letter writer and fantasist seemed to stride off my flashy pages , out of my mind , and plant himself in reality . It was late , we were playing kissing games , and Jessica and I were called on to kiss in front of the others . We blushed and were flustered , and it turned out to be the fleetest brush of lips upon cheek . The kiss outraged our friends but it was done and meanwhile had released in me all the remote , exciting premonitions of lust , all the mysterious sensations that I had imagined a truly consummated kiss would convey to me . It was at that party that , finally overcoming my timidity , inspired by tales only half-understood and overheard among older boys , I asked Jessie to spend New Year's Eve with me . Lovingly , she accepted , and so great was my emotion that all I could think of saying was , `` You're amazing , you know '' ? ? Later , we agreed to think of how we wished to spend that night . We would write to one another and make a definite plan . She was terribly pleased . Among my school and neighborhood friends , during the next months , I bragged and swaggered and pompously described my impending date . But though I boasted and gave off a dapper front , I was beneath it all frightened . It would be the first time I had ever been completely alone with a girl I loved . I had no idea of what subjects one discussed when alone with a girl , or how one behaved : Should I hold her hand while walking or only when crossing the street ? ? Should I bring along a corsage or send one to her ? ? Was it preferable to meet her at home or in the city ? ? Should I accompany her to the door of her home , or should I ask to be invited in ? ? In or out , should I kiss her goodnight ? ? All this was unknown to me , and yet I had dared to ask her out for the most important night of the year ! ! When in one letter Jessica informed me that her father did not like the idea of her going out alone on New Year's Eve , I knew for a moment an immense relief ; ; but the letter went on : she had cried , she had implored , she had been miserable at his refusal , and finally he had relented -- and now how happy she was , how expectant ! ! Her optimism gave me heart . I forced confidence into myself . I made inquiries , I read a book of etiquette . In December I wrote her with authority that we would meet on the steps of the Hotel Astor , a rendezvous spot that I had learned was the most sophisticated . We would attend a film and , later on , I stated , we might go to the Mayflower Coffee Shop or Child's or Toffenetti's for waffles . I set the hour of our meeting for seven . At five o'clock that night it was already dark , and behind my closed door I was dressing as carefully as a groom . I wore a new double-breasted brown worsted suit with a faint herringbone design and wide lapels like a devil's ears . My camp-made leather wallet , bulky with twisted , raised stitches around the edges , I stuffed with money I had been saving . Hatless , in an overcoat of rough blue wool , I was given a proud farewell by my mother and father , and I set out into the strangely still streets of Brooklyn . I felt superior to the neighborhood friends I was leaving behind , felt older than my years , and was full of compliments for myself as I headed into the subway that was carrying its packs of passengers out of that dull borough and into the unstable , tantalizing excitement of Manhattan . Times Square , when I ascended to it with my fellow subway travellers ( all dressed as if for a huge wedding in a family of which we were all distant members ) , was nearly impassable , the sidewalks swarming with celebrants , with bundled up sailors and soldiers already hugging their girls and their rationed bottles of whiskey . Heavy-coated , severe-looking policemen sat astride noble horses along the curbside to prevent the revellers from spilling out in front of the crawling traffic . The night was cold but the crowd kept one warm . The giant electric signs and marquees were lit up for the first time since blackout regulations had been instituted , and the atmosphere was alive with the feeling that victory was just around the corner . Cardboard noisemakers , substitutes for the unavailable tin models , were being hawked and bought at makeshift stands every few yards along Broadway , and one's ears were continually serenaded by the horns' rasps and bleats . An old gentlemen next to me held a Boy Scout bugle to his lips and blasted away at every fourth step and during the interim shouted out , `` V for Victory '' ! ! His neighbors cheered him on . There was a great sense of camaraderie . How did one join them ? ? Where were they all walking to ? ? Was I supposed to buy a funny hat and a rattle for Jessica ? ? It was a quarter of seven when the crowd washed me up among the other gallants who had established the Astor steps as the beach-head from which to launch their night of merrymaking . I looked over their faces and felt a twinge : they all looked so much more knowing than I . I looked away . I looked for Jessica to materialize out of the clogging , curdling crowd and , as the time passed and I waited , a fiend came to life beside me and whispered in my ear : How was I planning to greet Jessica ? ? Where exactly would we go after the movie ? ? Suppose the lines in front of the movie houses were too long and we couldn't get in ? ? Suppose I hadn't brought along enough money ? ? I felt for my wallet . Its thick , substantial outline calmed me . But when I saw that it was already ten past seven , I began to wonder if something had gone wrong . Suppose her father had changed his mind and had refused to let her leave ? ? Suppose at this very moment her father was calling my house in an effort to cancel the plans ? ? I grew uneasy . All about me there was a hectic interplay of meetings taking place , like abrupt , jerky scenes in old silent movies , joyous greetings and beginnings , huggings and kissings , enthusiastic forays into the festive night . Whole platoons were taking up new positions on the steps , arriving and departing , while I stayed glued , like a signpost , to one spot . At 7:25 two hotel doormen came thumping down the steps , carrying a saw-horse to be set up as a barricade in front of the haberdashery store window next to the entranceway , and as I watched them in their gaudy red coats that nearly scraped the ground , their golden , fringed epaulets and spic , red-visored caps , I suddenly saw just over their shoulders Jessica gracefully making her way through the crowd . My heart almost stopped beating . There were thirty-eight patients on the bus the morning I left for Hanover , most of them disturbed and hallucinating . An interne , a nurse and two attendants were in charge of us . I felt lonely and depressed as I stared out the bus window at Chicago's grim , dirty West Side . It seemed incredible , as I listened to the monotonous drone of voices and smelled the fetid odors coming from the patients , that technically I was a ward of the state of Illinois , going to a hospital for the mentally ill . I suddenly thought of Mary Jane Brennan , the way her pretty eyes could flash with anger , her quiet competence , the gentleness and sweetness that lay just beneath the surface of her defenses . We had become good friends during my stay at Cook County Hospital . I had told her enough about myself to offset somewhat the damaging stories that had appeared in local newspapers after my little adventure in Marshall Field & Co. . She knew that I lived at a good address on the Gold Coast , that I had once been a medical student and was thinking of returning to the university to finish my medical studies . She knew also that I was unmarried and without a single known relative . She wasn't quite sure that I felt enough remorse about my drinking , or that I would not return to it once I was out and on my own again . This had worried her . `` I read those newspaper stories about you '' , she had said . `` You must have loved that girl very much , but you couldn't have meant it when you said that you wanted to kill her '' . `` Why do you say that '' ? ? I asked . `` I was full of booze and , well , a drunk is apt to do anything he says he'll do '' . Nonsense ! ! I grew up in an Irish neighborhood on Chicago's West Side . Don't tell me about drunks . You're not the kind to go violent . Were you in love with that girl '' ? ? `` Would it make any difference to you if I were , Mary Jane '' ? ? She met my eyes , suddenly angry . `` I wouldn't have gone into nursing if I didn't care about people . I'm interested in every patient I've helped take care of . When I think of people like you , well , I '' -- `` You what , Mary Jane '' ? ? `` You are young , intelligent , have a whole lifetime before you to make something worth while of yourself , but you mess it up with whiskey , indifference , self-destructive attitudes . I don't blame that girl for breaking her engagement with you . Was she pretty '' ? ? `` Oh , yes '' , I said , feeling annoyed , `` she was very pretty . You don't believe that I'm going back to medical school and finish , do you '' ? ? `` Why should I ? ? I've worked this ward for three months now . We keep getting the same ones back again and again . They all mean well , have great promises to make when they are about to go home , but drinking is their sickness . You've not seemed like them , but maybe you are . You've treated your stay here like a big joke . It's not a joke to be sent to a place like this or to Hanover . I wanted to go to college , too '' -- `` Why didn't you '' ? ? I asked . `` Chicago has some of the best '' -- Her eyes flashed angrily . `` That's what I mean about you , Anderson '' , she said . `` You don't seem to know much about reality . I'll tell you why I didn't go to college ; ; I'm the oldest of six children . My father's a policeman and makes less than seven thousand dollars a year . There was no money for tuition , for clothes , for all the things you apparently take for granted . Nurses' training here doesn't cost anything . They even pay me six dollars a month . I think it's a good deal . I'm going to become a good nurse , and I've got two baby brothers that are going to have college if I have to work at my profession until I'm an old maid to give it to them '' . `` Do you have a boy friend '' ? ? I asked . `` That's none of your business '' , she said , then changed the subject . `` What about your father and mother , don't you think of them when you're in a place like this '' ? ? `` My father and mother died when I was two years old '' , I said . `` My aunt raised me . Aunt Mary died when I was doing my military service . I have no one but myself to worry about '' . Something in my voice must have touched her deeply because her anger passed quickly , and she turned away to keep me from seeing her face . `` I'm sorry '' , she said . `` I don't know what I'd do without my family . We've always been so close '' . `` Tell me more about them '' . Her eyes became bright as she talked about her father and mother , aunts and uncles , cousins . Listening , I felt cheated and lonely as only an orphan can . When she had finished I said : `` Your dad sounds like a good father and a good policeman . I'll bet he wouldn't be pleased if a rumdum like me were to ask his daughter for a date -- I mean , after I'm out of the hospital , a month or so from now '' . `` My father is a sergeant of detectives and has been attached to Homicide for five years . He's a pretty good judge of character , Anderson . I don't think he'd mind too much if he were sure you'd decided not to be a rumdum in the future '' . `` What about you ? ? How would you feel about it if I were to ask you for a date when I get through at Hanover '' ? ? `` If I thought you were serious about going back to school , that you'd learned something from your experiences here and at Hanover -- well , I might consider such an offer . What about your that girl you were going to kill '' ? ? It suddenly seemed very important to me that Mary Jane Brennan should know the truth about me -- that I was not the confused , sick , irresponsible person she believed me to be . `` There are things about me that I can't tell you now , Mary Jane '' , I said , `` but if you'll go out to dinner with me when I get out of Hanover , I'd like to tell you the whole story . I can say this : I'm dead serious about going back to school . As for that other girl , let's just say that I never want to see her again . You will get to come home on long weekends from Hanover , won't you '' ? ? `` Yes , I'll get one overnight a month '' . `` We'll go up to the Edgewater Beach Hotel for dinner '' , I said . `` Do you like to dance ? ? They always have a good orchestra '' . `` I like to dance '' , she said , then turned and walked away . There hadn't been anything really personal in her interest in me . I knew that . It was just that she felt deeply about every patient on the ward and wanted to believe that they might benefit from their treatment there . Now , riding this hospital bus , feeling isolated and utterly alone , I knew that she was genuine and unique , quite unlike any girl I had known before . It seemed the most important thing in my life at this moment that she should know the real truth about me . It was a fantastic story . Only two people in the state of Illinois knew that I was entering Hanover State Hospital under an assumed name , or why . It was unlikely that any girl as sharp as Mary Jane Brennan would believe it without proof . But I had the proof , all documented in a legal agreement which I would show her the moment I was free to do so . As the bus turned into the main highway and headed toward Hanover I settled back in my seat and closed my eyes , thinking over the events of the past two weeks , trying to put the pieces in order . I wondered suddenly as I listened to the disconnected jabberings coming from the patient behind me , if I had not perhaps imagined it all . Perhaps this was reality and Dale Nelson , the actor , was delusion ; ; a figment of Carl Anderson's imagination . Four I had come to Chicago from New York early in September with a dramatic production called Ask Tony . It was a bad play , real grade-A turkey , which only a prevalence of angels with grandiose dreams of capital gain and tax money to burn could have put into rehearsal . No one , not even the producer , had any real hope of getting it back to Broadway . But because it was a suspense gangster story of the Capone era , many of us felt that it might catch on for a run in Chicago , continue as a road company , and eventually become a movie . Such optimism was completely unjustified . The critics literally screamed their indignation . Ask Tony was doomed from the moment Kupcinet leveled on it in his Sun-Times column . We opened on Friday and closed the following Monday . Out of the entire cast I alone received good notices for my portrayal of a psychopathic killer . This let me in for a lot of kidding from the rest of the company , two members of which were native Chicagoans . We were paid off Tuesday morning and given tickets back to New York . I felt lonely and depressed as I packed my bags at the Croydon Hotel . It seemed to me that my life was destined to be one brilliant failure after another . I had been among the top third in my class at N.Y.U. , had wanted desperately to go to medical school , but I'd run out of money and energy at the same time . Then later I had quit my safe , secure five-a-week spot on a network soap opera to take a part in this play . It seemed to me that I was not only unlucky but quite stupid as well . I knew that I'd soon be back working as an orderly at the hospital or as a counterman at Union News or Schraffts while waiting for another acting job to open . It suddenly occurred to me that I did not particularly like acting , that I was at some sort of crossroads and would have to decide soon what I was going to do with my life . I closed the last bag and stood all three at the door for the bellboy to pick up , then went to the bathroom for a drink of water . The telephone rang . When I answered it a voice too dignified and British to be real said , `` Is this Mr. Dale Nelson , the actor '' ? ? `` All right '' , I said . `` Why don't you bastards lay off for a while '' ? ? `` I beg your pardon , sir '' ? ? `` All right . This is Dale Nelson the actor '' . `` Good . I'm calling you , Mr. Nelson , at the request of Mr. Phillip Wycoff . Could you possibly have lunch with him today ? ? His car could pick you up at your hotel at twelve '' . I smiled . `` You'll send the Rolls-Royce , of course '' ? ? `` Yes , of course , Mr. Nelson '' . I started to say something else appropriate , but the man had hung up . I finally went downstairs to the bar off the main lobby where most of the cast were drowning their sorrows over the untimely passing of Ask Tony . They all bowed low as I approached them . `` All right , you bastards '' , I said , `` the great actor is about to buy a drink '' . I laid a tenspot on the bar and motioned to the bartender to serve a round . He had just returned my change when the doorman came in off the street to page me . I walked over to him . `` You Mr. Nelson '' ? ? He asked . `` That's right '' . `` Mr. Wycoff's car is waiting for you at the east entrance '' . I followed him out through the lobby to the street . An ancient Rolls-Royce , as shiningly impressive as the day it came off the ship , was parked at the curb . The elderly chauffeur , immaculate in a dark uniform , stood stiffly at attention holding open the door of the town car . I was giving the parked cars the once-over . The Oldsmobile with the license number JYJ 114 was in stall number five . `` Okay '' , I said to the attendant , `` I'll let you know if I close the deal on the office in this building '' . I walked with him back to the entrance . He gave me a ticket on the agency car and parked it . I was back in ten minutes . `` Forgot to get something out of the car '' , I told him , showing him my ticket . He started to say something as I walked in and then suddenly grinned and said , `` Oh , yes . You're the one I was talking to about a monthly rental . `` That's right '' , I told him . He consulted the parking ticket , then looked at a notation and said , `` You're in the third row back toward the rear . Can you find it all right '' ? ? `` Sure '' , I told him . I went back to the agency car and got out an electric bug , one of the newest devices for electronic shadowing . I always keep a set in the car . I put in new batteries so as to be certain I'd have plenty of power and on my way out walked over to the regular parking stalls and stood looking at them thoughtfully . I waited until the parking attendant was busy with a customer , then slipped around the back of the car with license number JYM 114 , attached the electronic bug to the rear bumper and walked out . The attendant waved me on . One of the hardest chores a detective has is hanging around on a city street , trying to make himself inconspicuous , keeping an eye on the entrance of an office building and waiting . For the first fifteen or twenty minutes it's possible to be more or less interested in window displays , then in people passing by . After a while , however , a person's mind gets fed up and that magnifies all of the disagreeable physical symptoms which go with that sort of an assignment . You want to sit down . Your leg muscles and back muscles feel weary . You're conscious of the fact that your feet hurt , that the city pavements are hard . I waited a solid two hours before my man came out of the office building . He came out alone . I wasn't far behind him when he entered the parking lot and hurried over to his car . The attendant recognized me once more and said , `` What did you do about that office '' ? ? `` I haven't made up my mind yet '' , I said . `` It's a sublease . I have a couple of them I'm figuring on ; ; one here and one that's out quite a ways where there's usually curb parking '' . `` That curb parking is undependable and annoying , particularly when it rains '' , he said . I kept trying to get him to take my money . `` Okay '' , I told him . `` I'm in a rush right now . I know where the car is . Want me to drive it out '' ? ? `` I'll have one of the boys get it '' , he said . `` It's one of the rules on transients . Regulars drive out their own cars '' . `` Make it as snappy as you can , will you '' ? ? I asked . `` Oh , that's all right '' , he said . `` You're going to be a regular . You'll get in the office building here . You don't want to lease a place way out in the sticks . You get business where the business is , not where it isn't '' . I grinned at him , handed him a couple of dollars and said , `` By the time you get the parking charge figured up , there should be a cigar in it for you '' . I hurried over to the agency heap , jumped in , started the motor and was just in time to see the car I wanted to shadow turn to the left . I was held up a bit trying to make a left turn . By the time I'd made it he was gone . Traffic was pretty heavy . I turned on the electric bug , and the signal came in loud and clear . I made time and picked him up within ten blocks . I stayed half a block behind him , letting lots of cars keep in between us , listening to the steady beep beep beep . After fifteen minutes of traffic driving he turned to the left . I couldn't see him , but the electric bugging device gave steady beeps when it was straight ahead , short half beeps when the car I was following was to the left , and long drawn-out beeps when it turned to the right . If it ever got behind me , the beep turned to a buzz . I turned left too soon and got a signal showing that I was still behind him but he was to the right . After a while the signal became a buzz and I knew he was behind me . That meant he'd parked someplace . I made a big circle until I located the car parked at the curb in front of an apartment house . I found a parking place half a block away , sat in the car and waited . My quarry was in the apartment house for two hours . Then he came out and started driving toward the beach . By this time it was dark . I could get up close to him where there was traffic but had to drop far behind when there wasn't traffic . My lights would have been a giveaway if I'd tried to shadow him in the conventional manner . Moreover , I'd have lost him if it hadn't been for the electronic shadowing device . His signal was coming loud and clear and then all of a sudden it turned to a buzz . I circled the block and found he was in the parking lot of a high-class restaurant . I sat where I could watch the exit and realized I was hungry . I sat there with the faint odor of charcoal-broiled steaks tantalizing my nostrils and occasionally catching the aroma of coffee . My man came out an hour later , drove to the beach , turned right and after half a mile went to the Swim and Tan Motel . It was a fairly modern motel with quite a bit of electrical display in front . I remembered it was the Peeping Tom place . I waited until my man was coming out of the office with the key to a cabin before I went in to register . The card the man I was shadowing had filled out was still on the counter . I noticed that he was in Unit 12 and that he had registered under the name of Oscar L. Palmer and wife , giving a San Francisco address . He had written out the license number of his car but had transposed the last two figures , an old dodge which is still good . Ninety-nine times out of a hundred the motel manager doesn't check the license number on the plates against the license number the tenant writes out . If he does , it's still better than an even chance he won't notice the transposition of the numbers , and if he should notice it , the thing can be passed off as an honest mistake . I used the alias of Robert C. Richards , gave the first three letters and the first and last figure of the license number on the agency heap , but a couple of phony numbers in between . I could have written anything . The manager of the motel was a woman who apparently didn't care . She was complying with the law in regard to registrations but she certainly wasn't checking license numbers or bothering the tenants . `` You mean you're all alone , Mr. Richards '' ? ? `` That's right '' . `` Your wife isn't going to join you -- later '' ? ? `` I don't think so '' . `` If you expect her to show up '' , she said , `` you'd better put ' and wife ' on there . It's a formality , you know '' . `` Any difference in the rate '' ? ? I asked . `` Not to you '' , she said smiling . `` It's ten dollars either way . There are ice cubes in a container at the far end and in another by the office . There are three soft-drink vending machines , and if you should be joined by -- anybody -- try to keep things quiet , if you will . We like to run a nice quiet place '' . `` Thank you '' , I told her . I took another sidelong glance at the other registration card , then took the key to Unit 13 that she had given me and went down long enough to park the car . The construction was reasonably solid ; ; not like the cracker-box construction of so many of the motel units that have stucco all over the outside but walls that are thin enough so you can hear every movement of the people in the adjoining apartment . I put a small electric amplifier against the wall on the side I wanted to case . With the aid of that I could hear my man moving around , heard him cough a couple of times , heard the toilet flush , heard the sound of water running . Whoever his companion was going to be , she was going to join him later . She knew where to come . He didn't have to telephone . I was so hungry my stomach felt all lines of communication had been severed . It's one thing to go without food when you're occupied with some work or when you're simply postponing a meal , but when you're dependent on someone else and know that you can't eat until he's bedded down for the night , hunger can be a gnawing torture . I had noticed a drive-in down the road a quarter of a mile . The batteries on the bugging device I had put on the car were still fresh enough to send out good strong signals . The powerful microphone I could press against the wall between my motel unit and that occupied by the man would bring in the sound of any conversation , and I was positively nauseated I was so hungry . I got in the car , drove down to the drive-in and ordered a couple of hamburgers with everything included , a cup of coffee and the fastest service possible . The place wasn't particularly busy at that time of night , and the girl who was waiting on me , who was clothed in the tightest-fitting pair of slacks I had ever seen on a woman and a sweater that showed everything there was -- and there was lots of it -- wanted to be sociable . `` You really in a hurry , Handsome '' ? ? She asked . `` I'm in a hurry , Beautiful '' . `` It's early in the evening to be in a hurry . There's lots of time left '' . `` There may not be any women left '' , I said . She gave a little pout and said , `` I don't get off work until eleven o'clock . That's when my evening commences '' . `` I'll be here at ten-fifty-five '' , I said . `` Oh , you ! ! '' She announced . `` That's what they all say . What's that thing going buzz-buzz-buzz in your car '' ? ? I said `` Darn it , that's the automatic signal that shows when the ignition key is on . I didn't turn it off '' . I reached over and switched off the electronic bugging device . She went in to get the hamburgers , and I switched on the device again and kept the signal from Dowling's car coming in steady and clear until I saw her starting back with the hamburgers . Then I shut off the device again . She wanted to hang around while I was eating . `` Don't you think it's selfish to have dinner before you go to pick her up '' ? ? `` No '' , I said . `` It's a kindness to her . You see , she's on a diet . She'll eat just a pineapple and cottage cheese salad and I'm to have one with her so she won't feel out of place '' . `` Diets can be terrible '' , the girl said . `` How much overweight is she '' ? ? `` Not a bit '' , I said , `` but she's keeping her figure in hand '' . She looked at me provocatively . `` Good figures should be kept in hand '' , she said , and walked away with an exaggerated wiggle . I turned on the device again , half fearful that I might find silence , but the buzzes came in loud and clear . When I switched on the lights for her to come and get the check , I had the exact change plus a dollar tip . The fat man said , `` All we gotta do is go around the corner '' . The gun moved . The thin man said , `` That-a-way '' . `` -- second building on the right '' . `` -- it says police right on the door '' . `` -- so even if we was as dumb as you take us for , we could still find it '' . Roberta and Dave began to back toward the door . The thin man waved the gun again . He said , `` Right around the corner '' . `` It says water works , but there is a policeman on duty , too '' . `` A night policeman just like in the States . You know '' ? ? `` Canada doesn't have much of this here juvenile delinquency problem , but we keep a night policeman all the same on account of the crazy tourists '' . At the door , Dave paused to feel for the latch . Roberta glanced up at her husband . He was going to be sensible and not try to do anything rash with that gun pointed at him . She measured the distance from where they stood to the men and the gun , measured the distance from the men to the back room . She decided to risk it . There was something phony about all this gun waving -- something not quite what it seemed in the detailed directions for finding the police . Dave had the latch under his thumb now and he removed his arm from his wife in order to pull the door open . In a flash she was away to the back , paying no attention to three angry shouts from the male throats . She tore open the back door . It was dark inside the room but enough light spilled from the restaurant behind her to enable her to make out a round table with a green cloth top . There was a small sideboard with some empty beer bottles on it and perhaps fifteen wooden chairs . Slowly she turned to face the men again . Rat-face at the counter was on his feet . The distance between where she stood and where Dave waited at the outside door was a hundred miles . Keeping her frightened gaze on the men at the counter , she began to feel her way to the door . She sidled along the booths one step at a time . The gun followed her . As she reached Dave and felt his arm go around her , felt him pull her to the safety of his person , she knew with the certainty of despair that something bad had happened to Lauren . The two men watched as Dave closed the door behind them , watched them cross the sidewalk to their car . It was getting light . The fat man removed his apron , put on a greasy and wrinkled jacket , and zipped it over his paunch . The thin man moved swiftly to the phone and dialed a number . When he was answered , he said , `` Albert ? ? Vince . I'm sending you a couple of customers -- yeah -- just get them out of my hair and keep them out -- I don't give a damn what you tell them -- only don't believe a word they say -- they're out to make trouble for me and it is up to you to stop them -- I don't care how -- and one more thing -- Cate's Cafe closed at eleven like always last night and Rose and Clarence Corsi left for Quebec yesterday -- some shrine or other -- I think it was called Saint Simon's -- yeah , yesterday . Got it '' ? ? He turned from the phone and strode to the front of the restaurant . The white Buick hadn't moved away yet . Good . A line of worry formed , a twitch pulled his mouth over to one side . He said , `` Grosse ? ? You ain't kidding me -- the kid don't know the name of this town '' ? ? `` I ain't kidding you , Vince . How could she ? ? She musta been walking in her sleep -- you seen her yourself in here '' . `` Howda I know '' ? ? `` Remember how she looked when Barney held the door for her ? ? Kinda like a zombie ? ? She was just waking up when we found her at the garage '' . Vince swore . `` Stupid fools -- ain't got enough brains between the two of you '' -- Grosse muttered , his head down , one hand playing with the zipper on his jacket . `` -- had enough brains to call ya up so as ya could do sompin about it when the parents -- I coulda let her go go '' -- His eyes were lowered , so he couldn't have seen the narrow , pointed face of his companion suddenly writhe with fury ; ; but he was aware of it just the same . He knew Vince Steiner was one of those men who had to work up a fury once in a while just to prove how dangerous he could be . With a curse , Vince seized the thing nearest , a glass sugar container with a spouted metal top , and threw it against the wall opposite . The heavy glass didn't break , but the top flew off ; ; sugar sprayed with a hiss that was loud in the silence . Not really startled , but careful to appear so , Grosse sucked noisily on his pipe . Vince cursed steadily . `` Why does everything have to happen to me '' ? ? Grosse quietly got a broom and started to sweep up the sugar . Vince watched him . His mouth worked over the profanity , the obscenities in his vocabulary . Once he said , `` Why'n hell didn't you look in the back seat of the car before you drove off ? ? Don't you and Barney ever use your brains '' ? ? The fat man didn't answer . He got one of the menus and brushed the spilled sugar onto it and carried it to a box on the floor behind the counter . He returned the menu to its place between catchup bottle and paper napkin dispenser . He spoke soothingly . `` She don't know nothing about them cars . She thinks she's in a ordinary garage '' . `` How do you know , stupid ? ? And put Cate's gun back '' . `` I know '' . Grosse tucked the gun under the counter . `` -- one word of this gets to Guardino '' -- `` Who's telling Guardino '' ? ? Vince swore again . `` You get that kid over to Rose's house '' . The fat man winced . He ran a finger down his cheek , tracing the scratch there . `` Why can't I leave her locked up in the tool crib '' ? ? The thin man stopped his pacing long enough to glance at the clock . `` You and Barney get her over to Rose's before it gets too light . After Guardino's left , we'll dump the kid somewhere near the border where she kin get home . God help you if she knows where she's been '' . Grosse spread his hands . `` What am I going to do with her all day ? ? In the tool crib she can't get away '' . `` What the hell do I care what you do with her all day ? ? Just get her where Guardino won't see her and start asking questions '' . Grosse swore now . `` Dammit all , Vince . I ain't no baby sitter '' . Vince shouted finally , `` Get her over to Rose's and I'll come by and see that she stays put '' . Grosse rubbed the bridge of his nose where it was swollen . He spoke sullenly . `` You don't hafta get nasty . I wish you luck when you try scaring that kid '' . Suddenly he grinned . His voice lost its sullen tones and he chuckled . `` I got one question '' . `` What is it '' ? ? Impatiently . `` Are you a poor dumb Canadian or a smart aleck from the States '' ? ? Vince lifted his hand as if to strike , but his thin lips spread in a smile . Grosse ducked and sniggered . `` Where'd you say you was born '' ? ? `` In a Chicago slum just like you . And I ain't going back there on account of one lousy kid '' . Lauren Landis rubbed her face against the blanket . She had cried a little because she was frightened . She could easily understand why the two men had been startled to find a strange girl in the back seat of their car ( she had figured that out ) , but she couldn't understand their subsequent actions . Was it because she had shown panic ? ? Who could blame her for that ? ? It was one thing to awaken outside a restaurant where your parents were eating and quite another to awaken in a strange garage and know your parents had gone on home without you . She was glad the fat man had left . Barney was not really frightening . She jumped as the little man now appeared at the window and , reaching through the opening , offered her a bottle of coke . She smiled at him wetly . Although she found she was thirsty , she was about to refuse ( never , never take candy from a strange man ) when she saw the bottle was unopened . He placed a bottle opener on the counter . So , he understood her panic . She blew her nose on a tissue and opened the coke bottle . It was icy cold and tasted delicious . She felt a lift in spirit . When she was finished she pushed it back . The man was busy doing something to the inside of the door-frame on the driver's side of a car . She called softly , `` Barney '' . He looked in her direction but he didn't answer . She said , `` Barney , why is he keeping me here '' ? ? Still no answer . He seemed to be looking at a point above the little window . Lauren said , `` Why can't I call my home ? ? Or borrow some money from someone and go home by bus ? ? I could send the money right back '' . Barney finished the cigarette he had been smoking . He dropped it and carefully ground it to nothing with the sole of his heavy shoe . Now he looked at her . He said , `` I only work here '' . Lauren said , `` Please '' ? ? But he was back at work on a car . She dropped her head on her arms on the counter . How could he be kind one moment and cruel the next ? ? Did he know something that made him feel sad and sorry for her ? ? And was he afraid to do anything as definite as releasing her ? ? Her heart was thumping painfully ; ; the unknown was so much worse than -- what dangers lay ahead for her ? ? What awful thing had she to face in the next few hours ? ? Something wet and hot was trickling on her wrists . Tears ? ? With a sturdy act of will she turned her mind away from herself ; ; as long as she could do nothing constructive about the situation she was in , she would think about something else . Her mother and father , for instance . Where were they now ? ? In her mind she followed the white Buick along the road somewhere between here and the Niagara River . Her father's attention would be on the road ahead and it wouldn't deviate an inch until he crossed the bridge at the Falls and took the River Road to LaSalle and , finally , turned in at their own driveway at 387 Heather Heights . Then he would yawn and stretch and shout , `` All out . This is the end of the line '' . And what would her mother be doing right now ? ? Her mother would be fast asleep curled up against that wonderful , big , safe , solid shoulder next to her on the front seat . Lauren Landis was in trouble and she was alone . Roberta Landis put her hand on her husband's arm as he slid in the driver's seat beside her . Somewhere birds were sweetly calling , were answered . Her teeth chattered so that she made three attempts at speech before she became intelligible . `` Dave . I saw that woman's apron behind the door . There was a wet spot -- she couldn't have been gone long '' . Dave made some sound meant to convey agreement . He inserted the car key in the lock . Roberta was violently trembling . She stammered , `` You heard what he said about police ? ? Why don't we drive around the corner '' ? ? The car door crashed shut . The engine throbbed into life . Dave said , `` I got the message . We're going '' . Roberta said , `` no . You go . Walk . Suppose Lauren comes looking for us ? ? I can sit here in the car while you walk around the corner '' . The big car sprang away from the curb like something alive . He said , `` I'm not going to leave my wife and my car out here in sight of those '' -- Roberta glanced at him and stopped trembling . His jowls were spiked by barbs of graying beard . His small , mean eyes regarded Marty steadily , unblinkingly . His eyes were threaded by little filaments of red as if tiny veins had burst and flooded blood into them . As he chewed his gum and exuded wheezing breath , Marty smelt the reek of bad whiskey . Marty recognized the man . He had driven the car that passed them on the road outside Admassy's place . This was Acey Squire , proprietor of the juke joint . Marty smiled at Squire pleasantly and said , `` There was a cab waiting for me here . Do you know where it might have gone '' ? ? Squire chewed his gum , his jaw moving in a steady rhythm . He looked straight at Marty . He did not answer . Marty scanned the faces of the others nearest him , looked into their staring eyes . `` Did anyone see my cab '' ? ? He asked , keeping his voice casual . He avoided showing any surprise or annoyance when no one answered him . `` I have to get back to Jarrodsville '' , he went on . `` I see there are some cars here . I wonder if one of you gentlemen could drive me back to town ? ? I'd be happy to pay for the favor , of course '' . The seventeen men stood and stared at him for a moment longer . And then a startling thing occurred . It was so utterly unexpected that Marty stood for several moments with his mouth hanging open foolishly after it had happened . There was no word spoken , no apparent signal given . Yet the men all moved at the same instant . They piled into the waiting cars , motors roared , the cars sped off . The station wagon and the old Plymouth headed east toward Jarrodsville . The Ford and the pickup truck sped west toward Sanford's Run . In seconds all four cars were out of sight . Marty Land stood alone on a red-clay road as storm clouds gathered ominously in the sky again . From a great distance thunder growled and broke the silence . Land looked back toward the dilapidated house . He thought he saw a pale face at a window . Perhaps it was Dora May . Perhaps she would be glad that they hadn't hurt him . There were other farmhouses nearby . Across the road there was one no more than a hundred yards away . There was another on this side , a little further down . There were many more between here and Jarrodsville . Telephone poles lined the road . They reared tall and mocking . Their wires stretched out into infinity . Not a single strand of wire reached into the silent houses beside the red-clay road . There was nothing he could do but walk . And Jarrodsville was more than three miles away , down an old dirt road that the rain had turned into a quagmire . Marty faced east and started walking down the left side of the road . After he had proceeded a few feet , he paused and turned up the cuffs of his trousers , which were already damp and mud-caked . The viscous mud was ankle-deep , and in places great puddles spread across the road and reflected the murky light . As he approached the first farmhouse , thunder sounded behind him again , closer now and louder , like a steadily advancing drum corps . There were several people on the porch of the farmhouse . There was a very old man and a young woman and a brood of children ranging from toddlers to teen-agers . For just an instant he thought of appealing to them for help . Perhaps they had a car or truck and would drive him into town . Then he realized the utter futility of the idea . They were staring at him in the same blank and menacing way that the men outside the gate had stared . Even the eyes of the smallest children seemed malicious . On his side of the road there were two farm hands , well back in a field , leaning against a plow . They , too , stared at him . The drums of thunder were right behind him now . A foolish thought came into his head . He remembered a story he had read as a youth . It was probably one of Kipling's tales of the British Army . It concerned an officer who had been disgraced and drummed out . The steady roll of the drums had sounded behind him as he walked between the endless ranks of the men he had commanded , and each man about-faced and turned his back as the officer approached . Marty wished these poor farm people would turn their backs . The fencing by the roadside ended . Now the dirt highway was bordered on either side by a fairly deep drainage ditch , too broad to leap over unless you were an Olympic star . The day's rain had been added to the stagnant water . He was trapped on the road when he heard the sound of an approaching car . It was coming toward him . The car was now in sight . Marty's heart skipped a beat when he recognized it . It was the station wagon that had passed his cab on the road , the station wagon that had been parked at the Burch farm . Acey Squire's station wagon . It had headed back toward Jarrodsville . That had only been a ruse to lure him out on the deserted road . Now Acey and his friends were returning to seek him out . The station wagon came to a stop a couple of hundred feet in front of him , beside a fenced field . Then there was another sound . A second car was coming from the west , from the direction of Sanford's Run . It was the Ford that had been outside Burch's farm . Marty looked helplessly in both directions . It was a narrow road , barely wide enough for two cars to pass . He could not leave the road because of the water-filled drainage ditch . When the two cars were equidistant from him , the station wagon started up again and the Ford gathered speed . They bore down on him . There was nothing he could do except jump into the ditch . He jumped , and sank to his knees in muddy water . As the two cars roared by , there was a high-pitched eerie , nerve-shattering sound . Marty knew how the Union soldiers must have felt at Chancellorsville and Antietam and Gettysburg when the ragged gray ranks charged at them , screaming the wild banshee howl they called the Rebel yell . For moments he stood in water , shivering and gasping for breath . He had turned his ankle slightly , and it pained him . The cars , with their load of howling men , had disappeared in the distance . There had been two more cars parked at the farm , a Plymouth and a pickup truck . They would be coming for him next , bearing down on him from both directions . And then the station wagon and the Ford would seek him out again . He would be harassed repeatedly and would escape death by inches time after time , all the way to Jarrodsville . He still had three miles to go . Back East the more affluent juvenile delinquents , who could afford hyped-up autos instead of switch blades as lethal weapons , played this same game and called it `` Chicken '' . He could not go through the fields . That way was barred on both sides of the road by a high barbed-wire fence . He had to make for the section of road just ahead that was bordered by the rail fence , the section by the farmhouse . At least he could climb up on the fence when his tormenters roared by again . The Admassy place could not be far now . He would go in there , climb through the window , and at least be safe for a little while and able to rest . There was even a bare chance that the phone had not been disconnected . He did not dare climb back up to the road . He was deep in water , but at least they could not reach him there . He splashed on , mud sucking at his feet with each step , until he reached the end of the drainage ditch and the beginning of the fence that enclosed the farm . He climbed back to the road , and he felt utterly exhausted . He stood , panting , for a moment . And then he saw something that he had not seen before , and panic gripped him again . The fence , his only refuge when the metal death came roaring at him , was made of rails , all right , but the rails were protected by a thick screening of barbed wire that would rip his flesh if he pressed against it . He lurched on down the road despairingly , because there was no place else to go . He lost all sense of dignity . You could not stand on dignity when you were soaked and muddied and your life was at stake . Probably people were watching him from the porch or from behind the windows of this farmhouse , too , but he did not bother to look . He broke into a dogtrot , breathing heavily , streaming with sweat . He had to reach Admassy's place . It was his only sanctuary . The fences on both sides of the road bristled with the barbed wire . The fences stretched on endlessly . And then he heard them . And now he saw them . The Plymouth was coming at him from the east , the pickup truck from the west . They had timed it better this time . They would reach him at almost exactly the same instant . He stopped stone-still . If he backed against the fence , one of the cars would brush him as it passed , and he would be cruelly lacerated by the wire . He stumbled to the middle of the road and simply stood there , waiting for them , a perfect target . The cars must have had their gas pedals pushed down to the floor boards . They were coming on at reckless speed for such old vehicles . They thundered at him . He held his arms close to his sides and made himself as small as possible . When the Plymouth neared , it veered toward him and seemed about to run him down . He forced himself to stay frozen there . If he moved , he would be in the path of the other car . He thought the fender of the Plymouth brushed his jacket as it went by . In a fraction of a second the pickup truck hurtled by on the other side . The weird , insane sound of the Rebel yell reverberated again and echoed from the distant hills . He did not leave the middle of the road . He did not try to run . He trudged on , his aching eyes focused straight ahead . He was nearing the Admassy house . He was going to make it , he told himself . And then he heard a car coming from the east , and he felt as if he would break down and weep . `` Oh , no , not again '' , he said aloud . `` Not again so soon '' . There was a new sound , a sound as piercing as the Rebel yell , yet different . It was the sound of a siren . Now he saw that the approaching car was painted white , and he began to wave his arms frantically . It was the prowl car from the sheriff's office . The car drew up alongside him and stopped . `` Get in '' , Charley Estes said brusquely . He staggered into the back seat and lay back , fighting for breath . There was someone in front with the sheriff . It was Pete Holmes , the cabdriver . Pete turned around and said to Marty , `` I guess you think I'm a yellow-bellied hound . But there wasn't no use in me staying there . I couldn't fight a dozen or so of 'em . If I'd stayed , all that I'd have got was four punctured tires and one busted head . Why didn't you wait at the Burch house ? ? You must've known I'd gone to get the sheriff . I was lucky they let me go , I guess '' . The sheriff was occupied with maneuvering the car around in a very narrow space . When it was finally pointed east , he said , `` You should never have come out here alone . This is redneck country . Every man in every one of these houses is a Night Rider . Then he turned the telephone over to Rourke , and went into the bedroom to change his slippers for dry socks and shoes . Rourke was talking on the phone when he came back . `` About an hour , eh ? ? Are you positive '' ? ? He listened a moment and then said , `` Hold it '' . He turned his head and said , `` Alvarez will definitely be in a back room at the Jai Alai Club on South Beach within an hour . Want to try and meet him there '' ? ? Shayne looked at his watch . That wasn't too far from Fifth Street , and should allow him to make Scotty's Bar by midnight . He said with satisfaction , `` That's fine , Tim . I'll be there '' . Rourke confirmed the appointment over the phone and hung up . `` I don't know what you're getting into , Mike '' , he said unhappily . `` I hope to Christ . '' Shayne said briskly , `` Grab another drink if you want it . We've got one other call to make before I meet Alvarez '' . `` Where '' ? ? `` It's out in the Northeast section . Have you got my car here '' ? ? `` It's parked in front '' . Rourke hastily slopped whiskey into his glass on top of half-melted ice-cubes . `` I'd better keep on driving yours '' , Shayne decided , `` because I'll be going on over to the Beach . I can drop you back here to pick mine up '' . He went to a closet to get a light jacket , and took his hat from beside the door . Timothy Rourke gulped down the whiskey hastily and joined him , asking , `` Who are we going to call on in the Northeast section '' ? ? `` A lady . That is , maybe not too much of a lady . At least , I want to find out whether she's home yet or not '' . He opened the door and followed Rourke out . In Rourke's car , Shayne drove east to Biscayne Boulevard and north toward Felice Perrin's address which had been given to him by the Peralta governess . As he drove , he filled in Timothy Rourke briefly on the events of the evening after leaving the reporter to go to the Peralta house , and on his own surmises . `` I want to be in Scotty's Bar at midnight when Marsha makes her phone call there '' , he ended grimly . `` I don't know whether that threatening letter of hers has anything to do with this situation or not , but I want to see who takes the call '' . `` This deal at Las Putas Buenas where the two knife-men jumped you '' , said Rourke with interest , `` that sounds like it was set up with malice aforethought by the luscious Mrs. Peralta , doesn't it '' ? ? `` It does '' , Shayne grunted sourly , still able to taste her mouth on his in the Green Jungle parking lot . `` That story of hers about an unsigned note directing her to be there tonight sounds completely phony . If it was designed to put me on the spot , it would have to have been written before Peralta ever called me in on the case '' . `` Do you think Laura did have the counterfeit bracelet made without her husband's knowledge '' ? ? `` I haven't the faintest idea . I think her husband strongly suspects so , and that's why he called me in on the thing in direct defiance of his confederates and almost certainly without telling them why he was doing so . Isn't this Felice's street '' ? ? Shayne asked , peering ahead at the partially obscured street sign . Rourke could see it better out the right-hand side , and he said , `` yes . Turn to the left , I think , for that number you gave me . Not more than a block or so '' . Shayne got in the left-hand lane and cut across the Boulevard divider . There was a small , neon-lighted restaurant and cocktail lounge on the southeast corner of the intersection as he turned into the quiet , palm-lined street where most of the houses on both sides were older two-story mansions , now cut up into furnished rooms and housekeeping apartments . Shayne drove westward from the Boulevard slowly , letting Rourke crane his head out the window and watch for street numbers . A single automobile was parked half-way up the block on the left-hand side . Shayne noted idly that it carried Miami Beach license plates as he approached , and then saw the flare of a match in the front seat as they passed , indicating that it was occupied . He turned to see the briefly-illumed faces of two men in the parked car just as Rourke said , `` It's the next house , Mike . On the right '' . Instead of pulling into the curb , Shayne increased his speed slightly to the corner where he swung left . He went around the corner and parked , turning off his lights and motor . `` I told you , Mike '' , said Rourke in an aggrieved voice . `` It was back there . '' Shayne said , `` I know it was , Tim '' . His voice was chilling and cold . `` Did you see the car parked across the street '' ? ? `` I didn't notice it . I was watching for numbers . '' `` It has a Beach license , Tim . Two men in the front seat . I got a quick look at their faces as we went past . Unless I'm crazy as hell , they're two of Painter's dicks . A couple named Harris and Geely . Those names mean anything to you '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Mike . In Painter's office this evening . '' Shayne nodded grimly . `` The pair whom Petey is officially commending for slapping me around and pulling me in '' . `` What are they doing here '' ? ? `` A stake-out , I suppose . On Felice Perrin . Maybe with specific orders to see that I don't make contact with her . I'm not positive , Tim . I may be wrong . I'll slide out and walk around the block back to the cocktail lounge on Biscayne . You drive on and circle back and pull up beside them parked there . You're a reporter , and you're looking for Miss Perrin to interview her . Make them show their hands . If they are Beach cops on a stake-out , they'll admit it to a reporter . They've got no official standing on this side of the Bay . As soon as you find out if they are Geely and Harris , come on around to the lounge where I'll be waiting '' . Shayne opened the door on his side and stepped out . Timothy Rourke groaned dismally as he slid under the wheel . `` The things you talk me into , Mike . '' Shayne chuckled . `` How often do they add up to headlines ? ? You should complain '' . He crossed the street and walked swiftly southward to circle back to the Boulevard and north a block to the open restaurant . He was standing at the end of the bar enjoying a slug of cognac when Rourke came in six or eight minutes later . The reporter nodded as he moved up beside him at the bar . Shayne told the bartender , `` Bourbon and water '' , and Rourke told him , `` It's those two , all right . Harris and Geely . I made them show me their identification before I could be persuaded not to call on Felice Perrin '' . Shayne said happily , `` I've got it all worked out , Tim . Take your time with your drink . I'll beat it . In exactly three minutes , go in that phone booth behind you and call Police Headquarters . Be excited and don't identify yourself . Just say that a couple of drunks are having a hell of a fight down the street , and they better send a patrol car . Then hang up fast and come walking on down to the Perrin address . I'll be waiting for you there '' . The bartender brought Rourke's drink and Shayne laid a twenty-dollar bill on the bar . He said in a low voice , `` I've got a date with a lady , Mister . Will that pay for a pint I can take with me . You know how it is '' , he added with a conspiratorial wink . `` Candy is dandy , but liquor is quicker and you don't have any candy for sale here anyhow '' . `` We sure don't '' . The bartender winked back at him and palmed the bill . He turned away and returned in a moment with a pint of brandy in a small paper sack which he slid over the counter to Shayne . As the detective slid it into his pocket , Rourke asked sadly , `` What in hell are you going to do , Mike '' ? ? `` Make a couple of punk detectives named Geely and Harris wish to God they'd stayed out of my way this afternoon . Three minutes , Tim '' . Shayne strode out blithely , and Rourke checked his watch and sipped his drink , getting a dime ready to make the telephone call to the police . Outside , Shayne hesitated when he saw that Rourke had parked his coupe directly in front of the bar headed south . He walked over to the right-hand door , opened it and got the reloaded automatic out of the glove compartment and put it in his hip pocket . He hoped he wouldn't be forced to use it in taking care of the Beach detectives , but its weight was comforting at his hip . On this side of the Bay , Miami Beach cops had no more legal rights than any ordinary citizen , and Shayne's pistol permit was just as good as theirs . He went swiftly up the sidewalk toward the parked car with the two Beach detectives in the front seat . He tugged the brim of his hat low as he approached , stepped out into the street just behind the car and strode around to the right-hand side . The big , paunchy man named Geely was on that side , half-turned in the seat toward his hatchet-faced companion so that his back partially rested against the closed door . Shayne turned the handle and jerked the door open before either of the men were quite aware of his presence in the night . Geely grunted and slid partly out , and Shayne's left arm snaked in around his neck to help him , while he set himself solidly on the roadway and swung his right fist to the big , gum-chewing jaw before Geely could straighten up . Shayne stepped back to let him slump to the ground , and then dived over him through the open door into Harris who was cursing loudly and trying to drag a gun from a shoulder holster , somewhat impeded by the steering wheel . Shayne locked his big hands around Harris' thin neck and dragged him out over the seat into the roadway . He hit him once on the sharp point of his chin and felt the body go limp . He dropped him into the street a couple of feet away from Geely's recumbent figure and stared down at both of them for a moment before kicking the big man lightly in the side . He didn't stir . They were both breathing heavily , out cold , and Shayne didn't think either of them had recognized him or could describe him . He got the pint of liquor out of his pocket and unscrewed the top , sprinkled the pungent stuff liberally over both men , and then tossed the open bottle in on the front seat . He turned , then , to look toward the lighted Boulevard , and saw Rourke's tall , emaciated figure come out of the lounge and hurriedly start to angle across the street toward the opposite side . Shayne strolled across to intercept the reporter in front of the two-story house where Felice Perrin lived , and asked casually , `` Get the police okay '' ? ? `` Sure . Said they'd have a patrol car here fast . Let's get inside . What happened with you '' ? ? `` Why the two damned fools got all excited when they saw the bottle , and knocked each other out cold '' , Shayne said good-humoredly . `` They'll have fun explaining that to the Miami cops . Got no business over here on a stake-out anyway '' . They went up onto a front porch and into a small hallway where a dim bulb burned high in the ceiling . A row of mailboxes along the wall had numbers and names on them . Shayne found one marked Perrin Aj . The stairway on the right was dark , but there was a wall-switch at the bottom which lighted another dim bulb at the top , and they went up . There were two front rooms , both dark behind their transoms , and there was no sound or light in the entire house to indicate that any of the occupants were awake . Eight , nine steps above him , Roberts had paused . Mickey paused with him , waiting , no longer impatient , trying now to think it out , do a little planning . He looked down over the banister at the hotel desk , with the telephone and pen set . If I could call in , they could check the story while we were on our way . I wouldn't have to tell them I had Roberts -- Then he heard it , like a muffled thud , felt a subtle change in air pressure . He glanced up in time to see Roberts hurtling down on him from above , literally flying through the air , his bloody face twisted . Mickey tried to flatten against the banister , gripped it with one hand , but Roberts' full weight struck him at that moment in the groin . He gasped for air and the impact tore his hand from the rail . He tumbled with Roberts , helpless and in agony , over and over , down the steps . By a wrenching effort , he managed to hunch and draw in , to take the final fall on his back and shoulders rather than his head . He was fuzzy in his mind and , for a moment , helpless on the lobby floor , but he was conscious , and free of the weight of Roberts' body . When his vision cleared he saw the taller one scrambling upward , reaching . Mickey was on his knees when Roberts turned on the stairs and the razor flashed in his hand . He felt his empty pocket and knew that Roberts had retrieved the only weapon at hand . Mickey's eyes fixed on the other's feet , which would first betray the moment and direction of an attack . He rose stiffly , forcing his knees to lock . The knifelike pain in his groin nearly brought him down again . He made himself back off slowly , his eyes wary on Roberts , who now had no more to lose than he . The pain dulled as he moved , and he steadied inside . After a moment he extended one hand , the fingers curled . `` Come on '' , he said . `` You want to be that big a fool -- I was hoping for this '' . Roberts brushed at his eyes with his free hand and started down the steps . He held the razor well out to one side . He was invulnerable to attack , but he could be handled , Mickey knew , if he could be brought to make the first move . They were eight feet apart when Roberts cleared the last step . Mickey waited with slack arms . `` Any time , Roberts '' , he said . `` Or would it be easier if I put my hands in my pockets '' ? ? The taunt was lost on Roberts . He advanced slowly , directly , giving no hint of a feint to either side . He was just short of arm's reach when he stopped . Mickey backed off two steps , forcing him to come on again . There was a fixed grin on Roberts' face , made hideous by the swollen nose and the smeared blood . Mickey backed off again and Roberts hesitated , then came along . They moved in a series of rhythmic fits and starts , a macabre dance -- two steps back , two steps forward , two steps back . Mickey felt his shoulders come up against the wall beside the heavy slab front door . This was going to be it now , any second , and what he had to remember was to keep his eye on the razor , no matter what , even if Roberts should feint with a kick to the groin , the deadly hand was his exclusive concern . The kick came , sudden and vicious but short . Mickey's guts twisted with the effort , but he kept his eye on the weapon . It moved in a silver arc toward his throat , then veered downward . He hunched his left shoulder into it and slashed at Roberts' forearm with his own , felt the blade slide off his sleeve . Before Roberts could move inside to cut upward toward his face , he slammed his right fist into Roberts' belly . Roberts sagged and slashed at him wildly . Ducking , Mickey tripped and fell to one side , landing heavily on the wood floor . Then Roberts was on him , gasping for breath and for a couple of seconds Mickey lost sight of the blade . He felt it rip at the side of his jacket and a momentary sting under his left ribs . He got a knee up into Roberts' belly , used both hands and heaved him clear , then scrambled to his feet . They were in the center of the lobby now . Still clutching the razor , Roberts came up into a crouch , shaking his head . When he charged Mickey was ready . He hit Roberts with his left fist in the ribs and the razor cut toward him feebly , then wobbled in mid-air . With his right fist , and nearly all his weight behind it , he smashed at the bloodstained face . Roberts careened backward , his back arched , fought for balance and , failing , stumbled against the newel post at the foot of the stairs . The sound of his head striking the solid wood was an ultimate , sudden-end sound . He fell on his side across the lowest step , rolled over once , then lay still . Mickey found himself leaning against the desk , with stiff hands , panting for breath . After a minute he went to Roberts , looked at one of his eyes and felt for a pulse . He couldn't feel any . Roberts appeared to be dead ; ; if not yet , then soon , very soon . Suddenly it was cold in the lobby . 12 It seemed to him that a long time had passed before he decided what to do . Actually it was no more than eight or ten minutes , and the sum of his reasoning came to this : There's no way to take him in now and keep those other two -- Wister and the one who hired the two of them -- from finding out about Roberts and lamming out . The local law here would hold me till they check clear back home , and maybe more than that . They would have to . By then they could never catch up with the others . There's no other way ; ; I'll have to do it myself . He looked at where Roberts lay sprawled on the step . Mickey was sure now he was dead . One thing , he thought , nobody knows about it yet . Only me . He climbed the stairs , went into Roberts' room , found a suitcase and packed as much into it as he could . He left a few things . It didn't have to be perfect . Roberts was a wastrel . Walking away on impulse , he might logically leave behind what it was inconvenient to carry . When he had closed the suitcase he found a rag and moved about the room , wiping carefully everything he might have touched . It took him nearly an hour . He went to the room he had rented and got into his overcoat . He left the rest of his things and returned to the lobby . He set Roberts' suitcase near the front door , went outside and walked back to the garage . He was mildly surprised to find it was snowing . It snowed softly , silently , an undulating interruption of his vision against the night sky . He could feel it on his face and in his hair . He found the key to the Jeep , got it started and warmed it up for five minutes . Then he backed out and swung around to the front drive . He went into the hotel and searched till he found the razor . He put it in his own pocket for safekeeping . He took the suitcase out to the Jeep and put it in the front seat . Then he went back for Roberts . The body was heavier than he had anticipated . He got it onto his shoulder after some work and carried it outside and down to the Jeep . He dumped it into the back and made sure it wouldn't roll out , then returned to the porch and closed the front door , making sure it was unlocked . He drove carefully in the direction of the brief tour they had taken earlier . It snowed continuously , but quietly , evenly . When he reached the dip in the woods , he saw that already the earlier ruts were barely discernible . The Jeep fought its way through the low spot and got onto higher ground . He drove in low gear to the fork in the road and swung as close as possible to the entrance to the abandoned mine . He parked facing it and left the headlights on , but when he started into the tunnel with the suitcase , he found the illumination extended no farther than half a dozen feet into the passage . He went back and got the flashlight , returned to the tunnel and carried the suitcase to the edge of the pit he had found earlier . He tossed the bag into the pit and watched dry dust spray up around it . When the dust settled , he went back to the Jeep and carefully worked Roberts' body onto his shoulder . It wasn't like carrying the suitcase . The soft snow was deceitful underfoot . Twice he nearly fell . Inside the passage , he had to work his way over the fallen timber and nearly collapsed under his clumsy burden . By the time he reached the edge of the pit he was panting and his shoulder and back ached under the drag of the dead weight . He stood looking down for a few seconds , then backed up two or three paces from the edge . There was too much weight casually to toss it away . He could feel himself falling in with it and being unable to get out . It would be a bad place to die . It was a bad place for Roberts to wind up , but Roberts had asked for it . It was too late to worry about that . He knelt slowly and dumped the corpse onto the floor of the tunnel . It was a relief to get rid of the weight . He was shaking with tension and it took him a couple of minutes to get his breath and settle down . Then he got on his knees and rolled Roberts' body toward the edge . It hung momentarily on the point of dropping off . He gave it a strong push , heard it slide , then tumble dryly into the hole . He got to his feet and threw the flashlight beam into the pit . The body lay in an awkward sprawl twelve or fifteen feet below the level of the tunnel floor . Deep enough , he decided . There was little chance anyone would enter this shaft during the winter . The external signs of his approach to it would be covered by the snow , probably by the next day . It wasn't cold enough in the tunnel to preserve the body intact . By spring it would be a skeleton . He made his way back to the Jeep . He had started to back into the turn when he remembered the razor in his pocket . He climbed down , went back into the tunnel and tossed the razor into the pit . It landed on Roberts' sprawled right thigh , poised precariously , then slid off to the ground . He went back once more to the Jeep and started the short drive to the hotel . In the garage he checked the Jeep for signs of the use he had made of it . There were stains here and there and he cleaned them off , using an oiled rag he found on a nail . He wiped the steering wheel and all the places he might have touched the Jeep . He replaced the flashlight where it had been stowed , got into his own car and backed it out of the garage . There were tire marks where it had been , but they were overlapped by others and on the dusty floor would not be noticeable except under close scrutiny . Liz Peabody , he thought , might spend some time grieving for her lost lover , but he doubted that she would launch an investigation . He judged her to be a woman of some pride , though not much sense . Still she would probably have sense enough not to call in the local sheriff to find her boy friend who , apparently , had run away . He put in a call to Cunningham from his hotel room . The maid answered and he decided Nancy must be at work . Jeb cautioned him not to be too hopeful and then , ignoring his own advice , said excitedly , `` But it does sound good . A woman named Lisa who tells nobody anything about herself . That courtyard picture with the same initials '' . `` I'm not exactly jumping up and down with enthusiasm . I'll call you in a day or so '' . On the highway he relaxed and enjoyed the drive over Lake Pontchartrain and along the coast . Gulf Springs was ten miles inland -- more of a quaint old coast town than those along the beach made garish by tourist attractions . He checked into a motel and drove downtown . The courthouse was a white-stucco building minus the customary dome . Instead of the usual straggling privet hedges and patches of bare dirt in most small-town squares , the building was hemmed in by a semitropical growth of camellias and azaleas and a smooth lawn the improbably bright-green shade of florist's grass . He figured his best bet was a call on the sheriff . A clerk in the outer office took him in to Sheriff Carruthers , a big , paunchy man with thick , white hair and a voice with a senatorial resonance which suggested he should be running for higher office . Seated in front of the desk , Hank said , `` I'm looking for some information with very little to go on , Sheriff '' . He explained the background of the case , ending with the tenuous clue which had brought him to Gulf Springs . The sheriff's swivel chair tilted back . `` So you're looking for a woman who married a man who might have lived here a year ago and might have been poisoned . If there was such a person , I'm afraid she got away with it . Pity we don't know more about him . I think the best bet is to go through the society columns of last year and see if any of the grooms match with the obituaries a little later . It'll be a tedious job , but if you want to try it , the old newspaper files are in the basement here in the county supervisor's office '' . `` Maybe the society editor would remember a good-looking out-of-town bride '' . `` That's an idea . Mrs. Calhoun has been society editor here for twenty-five years . The editor says that marriages may be made in heaven , but weddings are made in Mrs. Calhoun's columns . She's the one who decides which wedding is to get the lead space in the Sunday paper and all that '' . He smiled . `` Once , when the editor was just out of the hospital from a gallstone operation , Mrs. Calhoun and the mother of the bride went out to his house and fought it out beside his bed . She'd be sure to remember any bride who was vague about background . She'd have made a great scientist dedicated to tracking down heredity and environment . She'd also remember if the groom died later '' . He stood up . `` I wish you good luck , but please don't dig up too tough a case for me this close to election . If you find out anything , come on back here and we'll get started on it '' . Tracking down Mrs. Calhoun was like trying to catch up with Paul Revere between Lexington and Concord . It turned out that she also sold real estate , cosmetics , and hospital insurance . The wearying trek stretched into the afternoon -- from newspaper plant to insurance office to her house and back to the newspaper , where he found her at five o'clock . She was a large woman with a frizzled gray poodle cut and a pencil clamped like a bit between her teeth while she hunted and pecked on an old typewriter . It took a couple of minutes to run through her various businesses and get down to the one he wanted . `` Last year ? ? Well , I do remember one . From Baton Rouge . Married a man named Vincent Black . I remember her because she didn't want her picture in the paper . First bride like that I've seen in twenty-five years '' . `` What reason did she give '' ? ? `` Said she had a breaking-out on her face -- some sort of allergy -- and none of her old pictures was good enough . I didn't see her till several days later at the wedding , and her face looked like it had never had a blemish on it . But , of course , you couldn't see too well through the veil '' . `` Was her name Lisa Carmody '' ? ? `` Now how in hell would I remember that '' ? ? `` Never mind . I can look it up . Do they still live here '' ? ? `` I think they moved away shortly after they were married . He was a salesman for something or other and must have been transferred . I'm sure it'll be in the files . We usually run a social note when somebody moves away '' . He stood up and thanked her . `` Have they inherited some money or something '' ? ? She asked with a reportorial gleam in her eye . He said vaguely , `` Well , it is a little legal matter , but nothing like that '' . He hurried across to the courthouse and caught the sheriff just as he was leaving . `` Sounds like what you're after '' , he said when Hank had finished . `` Come on , let's hurry down before they lock up for the day '' . In the basement the sheriff took him to a small , dingy office occupied by a tall , thin man informal in rolled-up shirt sleeves . `` Mr. Ferrell Hirey Lindsay , chairman of the board of supervisors . Mr. Ferrell is a private detective , Hirey . Wants to look up something in the newspaper files , so don't lock him in here '' . `` Sure '' , said Hirey . `` I'll just leave the door open . It latches when you close it , so stay as long as you like '' . Carruthers crossed the room to a metal door with an open grillework in the top half . He pulled it open . `` Now don't shut this door . It won't open from inside . Before we built the new jail , we used to keep prisoners in here overnight sometimes when the old jail got too crowded . Hirey treats himself a lot better than we do prisoners . They were a sight more comfortable than the ones in the jail with the cold air from Hirey's air conditioner coming through the grille '' . He walked past the sheriff into a windowless room with shelves full of big , leather-bound volumes from floor to ceiling all around the walls . A metal table and four chairs stood in the center . `` They're all here , back to 1865 '' , Carruthers told him . `` It's all right to smoke , but make sure your cigarettes are out before you leave . And , of course , you know not to take clippings '' . `` I'll leave the air conditioner on for you , Mr. Ferrell '' , said Hirey . `` Don't forget to turn it off and close the door good so it'll latch '' . Hank thanked them and promised to observe the rules . When they had gone , he stood for a minute breathing in the mustiness of old paper and leather which the busily thrumming air conditioner couldn't quite dispel . Chapter fourteen In a tour around the stacks , he found that the earliest volumes began on the left and progressed clockwise around the room . An old weakness for burrowing in records rose up to tempt him . It was , indeed , all here -- almost a century . From reconstruction to moon rockets . But he pulled away from the irrelevant old volumes and walked around to the newer ones . Last year's volume was at the top a couple of inches below the ceiling . Near it was a metal ladder on casters attached to the top shelf . He pulled it over , climbed up , and lifted out the big volume , almost losing his balance from the weight of it . He staggered over and dropped it on the table . Since Mrs. Calhoun remembered only that the marriage had been in the spring , he started to plod through several months . He tried to turn right to the society page in each one , but interesting stories kept cropping up to distract him . At last he found it in the paper of April 2 . It told him little more than Mrs. Calhoun had remembered , stating that it had been a small , modest wedding compared to some of the others . There was a marked contrast in the amount of information on bride and groom . Mr. Black's life was an open book , so to speak , from his birth in Jackson , Mississippi , through his basketball-playing days at L.S.U. and his attainment of a B.A. degree , which had presumably prepared him for his career as district sales manager for Peerless Business Machines . The one line on the bride said she was Miss Lisa Carmody from Baton Rouge . No mention of New Orleans . Hank was beginning to feel sharp concern for Mr. Black . If Mrs. Black was who he thought she was , Mr. Black's Peerless selling days might well be over . Now for their exodus from Gulf Springs . This time the search took twice as long , cutting down on his extra reading , for he had to pick through several columns of one- and two-line social notes in each issue . He found it in the edition of May 15 . The item said Mr. and Mrs. Black had moved to Jackson , his home town -- so the lovely Lisa had been with him a year ago . Next on his program was a call to the Jackson office of Peerless Business Machines to find out if Vincent Black was still with them -- or , more specifically , still with us . He glanced at his watch , saw it was only seven , and decided to indulge his weakness now . For the next hour he scrambled happily up and down the ladder , sharing the excitement of reporters who had seen McKinley's assassination , the Iroquois Theater fire in Chicago , and the Hall-Mills trial . In the middle of the stock market crash , he heard a slight noise in the outer office . He turned around , saw nothing , and decided it must be a mouse . Something else distracted him , yet there was no sound , only tomblike silence . Then he knew it was not sound , but lack of it . The air conditioner was no longer running . He jumped up and turned around to see the metal door closing . It clanged shut as he sprang toward it . He pressed his face against the grille . `` Who's there '' ? ? The light shining through the grille dimly illumined the office beyond -- enough for him to see there was no one there . Then he heard the outer door closing . `` Hey , come back '' , he shouted . He thought it must be some damn janitor or cleaning woman puttering around , figuring that Hirey had gone off and forgotten to turn off everything and lock up . Then the faint beginnings of fear stirred in his mind . Unless he was stone-blind , the person who'd just left couldn't have missed seeing Hank through the open door of the brightly lighted room . And even if he'd somehow missed seeing him , he wouldn't have gone off and left the light on and door open in the file room . Whoever it was had meant to shut him up in here , had followed him and waited till the courthouse and square were deserted . But why ? ? To search his room at the motel ? ? To come back later and kill him after the stores had closed around the square and everybody had left ? ? No , they could kill him just as easy right now . Nobody could hear what was going on in this underground vault . Then he heard it and smelled it -- the steady hissing , the dread , familiar pungency of gas escaping . It must be coming from an upright heater against the far wall in the supervisors' office . Until now , Lilac Gaylor and Lila Kingsley had been like an anagram which he could unscramble at his own pace and choosing . Except for those minutes in her room , he had lost touch with her as a reality . Gaylor's obsession and Cunningham's chimera-chasing reminiscences had mesmerized him into thinking of Lila and Lilac , separately or together , as a legend . They kept drifting apart and merging again in his mind like some minute form of life on a microscope slide . `` Well '' -- said Mr. Skyros . `` I take a little time to think it over '' . It was awkward : very awkward . There would be all the nuisance of contacting someone else to take over . Someone reasonably trustworthy . And Angie would hear about it . And Angie knew -- `` Time '' , said Angie , and he smiled very sweet and slow at Mr. Skyros . `` Not too much time , because I'll be needing some more myself pretty much right away . And I done favors for you , big favor not so long back , didn't I , and I'm right here to take on where Pretty left off . No trouble . I don't want no trouble , you don't want no trouble , nobody wants trouble , Mr. Skyros '' . Dear heaven , no , thought Mr. Skyros , turning away as another man came in . He straightened his tie at the mirror with a shaking hand ; ; the genial smile seemed painted on his face . Angie knew -- Speak of dangerous information ! ! Angie knew too much entirely already . Really he had Mr. Skyros at bay `` Big favor I done you . Acourse there's this deal o' Denny's -- and Jackie's -- kinda hangin' fire , ain't it , maybe you've been kinda worryin' over that . And can't say I blame you '' , said Angie thoughtfully . `` This deal with the ace o' spades . Anything to do with an ace o' spades , bad luck '' . Ace of spades -- a widow , that was what they called a widow , these low-class crooks remembered Mr. Skyros distractedly . All about that Angie knew , too . When things got a little out of hand , they very rapidly got a lot out of hand -- it seemed to be a general rule . All just by chance , and in a way tracing back to poor Frank , all of it , because naturally -- brothers , living together -- and Angie -- Mr. Skyros did not at all like the look on Angelo's regular-featured , almost girlishly good-looking face -- or indeed anything about Angelo . Mr. Skyros was not a man who thought very much about moral principles ; ; he found money much more interesting ; ; but all the same he thought now , uneasily , of the way in which Angelo earned his living -- and paid for his own stuff -- and eyed the soft smile , and the spaniel-like dark eyes , and he felt a little ill . `` Look , my friend '' , he said , `` in my life I learn , how is it the proverb says , better an ounce of prevention to a pound of cure . I stay in business so long because I'm careful . Two weeks , a month , we talk it over again , and maybe if nothing happens meanwhile to say the cops know this and that , then we make a little deal , isn't it '' ? ? `` That's a long while '' , said Angie . `` I tell you , you want to leave it that way , I don't fool around with it . I go over to Castro and get fixed up there . I can't wait no two weeks '' . And Mr. Skyros didn't like Angie , but what with Prettyman and three of his boys inside , and not likely to come out -- And Angie such a valuable salesman , Prettyman said -- All the nuisance and danger of getting in touch with practically a whole new bunch of boys -- Why did everything have to happen at once ? ? Denny said stupidly , `` Why , you ain't turning Angie down , are you , Mr. Skyros ? ? I mean , we all figured -- I guess anybody'd figure -- Angie '' -- Angelo gave him an affectionate smile . `` Mr. Skyros too smart a fellow want to get rid of me '' , he said . `` It's O.K. , Denny , everything's O.K. Ain't it , Mr. Skyros '' ? ? Oh , God , the name repeated over and over , anybody to hear -- Not being a fool , Mr. Skyros knew why . But aside from everything else , it would scarcely be pleasant to have dealings with one who was nominally an underling and actually held -- you could say -- the whip hand . And all because of Domokous ! ! If Mr. Skyros had dreamed of all the trouble that young man would eventually cause -- Of course , there was another factor . Angie worth his weight in gold right now , but these users , they sometimes went down fast . Who knew , Angie might not last long . The sweat broke out on Mr. Skyros' forehead as he realized he had been actually thinking -- hoping -- planning -- perhaps -- Good God above , had not Domokous been enough ? ? He patted Angelo's thin shoulder paternally . `` Now you don't want to go talking that way '' , he said . `` Sure , sure , you're the one take over for Pretty , soon as I get the supply , get started up again , isn't it ? ? You don't need worry , Angelo . I tell you , I know how it is with you , my friend , I sympathize , and I'll make it a special point -- a special favor -- get in touch , and get some stuff just for you . I don't know if I can manage it tonight or tomorrow , but I'll try my best , my friend . You see , you got to remember , we all got schedules , like any business ! ! My man , he won't be around a little while , he just fixed me up with this stuff they took out of the Elite . It's awkward , you see that , isn't it '' ? ? `` Well , that's your business , Mr. Skyros '' , said Angie , and his dreamy eyes moved past Mr. Skyros' shoulder to gaze vaguely out the ground-glass window . `` I appreciate it , you do that . Sure . We don't none of us want no trouble . I'm in a room over the Golden Club on San Pedro , you just ask for me there , you want see me . Or maybe I call you -- tonight ? ? About nine o'clock , I call and see if you got any . A couple decks for me , Mr. Skyros -- and ten-twelve to sell , see , I like to have a little ready cash '' . `` Oh , now , I don't know about that much '' , said Mr. Skyros . `` And you know , Angelo , Pretty , he always keeps it a strict cash basis , like they say '' -- `` Sure '' , said Angie . `` Sure , Mr. Skyros . Fifty a throw , that the deal ? ? Sure . I bring you the cash , say five hundred for ten decks . Never mind how much I cut it , how much I get '' , and he smiled his sleepy smile again . `` Standard deal , Mr. Skyros . You go 'n' have a look round for it '' . `` I do my best '' , said Mr. Skyros earnestly , `` just for you , my friend . This is awkward for everybody , isn't it , we all got to put up with inconvenience sometimes . But I do my best for you '' . He got out of there in a hurry , brushing past another man in the door , mopping his brow . The expedient thing -- yes , very true , one must make do as one could , in some situations . It could all be straightened out later . Not very much later , but when things had settled down a little . After this deal with the Bouvardier woman went through . An ace of spades . He was not a superstitious man , but he felt perhaps there was a little something in that , indeed . He rather wished he had never got into the business , and still -- scarcely to be resisted , a nice little profit with not much work involved , easy money Katya Roslev , who would be Katharine Ross so very soon now , rang up her first sale of the day and counted back the change . She did not notice that the customer seized her purchase and turned away without a smile or a word of thanks . Usually she marked the few who did thank you , you didn't get that kind much in a place like this : and she played a little game with herself , seeing how downright rude she could act to the others , before they'd take offense , threaten to call the manager . Funny how seldom they did : used to it , probably . The kind who came into a cheap store like this ! ! Grab , snatch , I saw that first ! ! And , Here , I'll take this , I was before her , you wait on me now or I don't bother with it , see ! ! This kind of place She'd be through here , just no time at all -- leave this kind of thing 'way behind . Off at noon , and she'd never come back . Never have to . Money -- a lot of money , enough . She'd be smart about it , get him to give it to her in little bills so's nobody would suspect -- maybe couldn't get it until Monday account of that , the banks -- But that wasn't really long to wait . Not when she'd waited so long already . No need say anything at all to the old woman . She had it all planned out , how she'd do . She'd say she didn't feel good on Sunday , couldn't go to church -- there'd be a little argument , but she could be stubborn -- and when the old woman had gone , quick pack the things she'd need to take , all but the dress she'd wear Monday , and take the bag down to that place in the station where you could put things in a locker overnight , for a dime . Then on Monday morning -- or it might have to be Tuesday -- get up and leave just the usual time , and last thing , put the money in an envelope under the old woman's purse there in the drawer . She wouldn't be going to get that for an hour or so after Katya had left , go do the daily shopping . No need leave a note with it , either -- or maybe just something like , Don't worry about me , I'm going away to make a better life . A better life . Escape . It wasn't as if she wanted much . She didn't mind working hard , not as if she figured to do anything wrong to live easy and soft -- all she wanted was a chance , where she wasn't marked as what she was . To be Katharine Ross , and work in a nicer shop somewhere , at a little more money so she could have prettier clothes , and learn ladies' manners and all like that , and get to know different people than up to now , not just the ones like her here , with foreign-sounding names , the ones went to the same church and -- Different place , different job , different people , she'd be all different too . Prettier , she'd do her hair another way ; ; smarter , and wear different kinds of clothes -- she'd be Katharine Ross , just what that sounded like . `` You've give me the wrong change '' , said the customer sharply . `` Think I can't count '' ? ? Katya made up the amount in indifferent silence . She was listening to other voices , out of the future . Some of those vaguely-imagined new , different people . Oh , Katharine's awfully nice , and pretty too , I like Katharine -- Let's ask Katharine to go with us , she's always lots of fun -- Katharine -- Soon , very soon now sixteen Mendoza didn't wake until nearly nine-thirty . It was going to be another hot day ; ; already the thermometer stood close to ninety . Alison was still sound asleep ; ; he made fresh coffee and searched through all the desk drawers for more cigarettes before thinking of her handbag , and found a crumpled stray cigarette at its bottom , which tasted peculiarly of face powder . He left a note propped on the desk asking her to call him sometime today , and drove home . After he'd got out fresh liver for Bast , he paused to look at her crouched daintily over her dish . Surely she was just a trifle fatter around the middle ? ? He seemed to remember reading somewhere that Abyssinians had large litters , and suffered a dismaying vision of the apartment overrun with a dozen kittens . `` Y que sigue despues ? ? -- What then '' ? ? He asked her severely . `` A lot of people are so peculiar that they don't like cats , it's not the easiest thing in the world to find good homes for kittens -- and , damn it , you know very well if I have them around long , impossible to give them away ! ! And I suppose now that you've finally grown up , if a little late , you'd go on producing kittens every six months or so . Yes , well , it's a pity to spoil your girlish figure -- which all those kittens would do anyway -- but I think when you've raised these we'll just have the vet fix it so there won't be any more . I wonder if the Carters would take one . And it's no good looking at me like that '' , as she wound affectionately around his ankles . Maude's long nose unexpectedly wrinkled up . `` Happened to be in the hall ! ! Happened to hear you quarrel about her ! ! Oh , well , you can't really blame Lolotte . She lost her beau to you '' . But she was talking of Emile when she saw the black line of the open door ; ; Sarah remembered it clearly . Maude went on . `` I've got to get busy . Miss Celie's taken to her bed , with the door locked . She opened it an inch and poked out the keys for me to give you . Here '' -- She thrust a bundle of keys strung on a thick red cord into Sarah's hand . `` Not that there's much use in locking up the smokehouse and the storehouse now . Drink your coffee '' -- coffee . `` It's -- cold '' . Maude suddenly looked quite capable of pouring it down her throat . `` I don't want it '' , Sarah said , firmly . `` Oh . Well -- I'll take it down with me as I go '' . Maude swooped up the cup and hiked up her top hoop as if about to take off with a racing start . At the door she turned back , her Roman nose looking very long now and satiric . `` I forgot . Ben and Lucien have gone after them . It's just like that book your Northern friend wrote -- except there aren't any ice floes to cross and no bloodhounds '' . `` I don't know Mrs. Stowe . What can they do if they find them '' ? ? `` They can't do anything . It's silly , childish , running after them like that . I told Ben so . But of course the paterollers won't be of any help , not with everything so upset and that Yankee cavalry outfit they say is running around , God knows where '' . She had swished away , she had been gone for a long time probably when Sarah suddenly realized that she ought to stop her , pour out the coffee , so no one would drink it . But then the so-called coffee was bad enough at best , cold it was all but undrinkable -- especially that cup ! ! She was deeply , horribly sure that Lucien had filled it with opium . She had quarreled with Lucien , she had resisted his demands for money -- and if she died , by the provisions of her marriage contract , Lucien would inherit legally not only the immediate sum of gold under the floorboards in the office , but later , when the war was over , her father's entire estate . She felt cold and hot , sticky and chilly at the same time . Now wait a minute , she told herself , think about it ; ; Lucien is not the only person in this house who could have put opium in that coffee . She had lost a bottle of opium -- but that was on the trip from New Orleans . Or someone had taken it during her first day at Honotassa . Yes , she had missed it after her talk with Emile , after dinner , just before Emile was shot . Rilly or Glendora had entered her room while she slept , bringing back her washed clothes . So somebody else could have come in , too -- then or later while she was out of the room . It would have been easy to identify as opium by its odor . It was not very reasonable to believe that Lucien had procured unprocurable opium and come back to Honotassa with a formed plan to murder her . He didn't even know that she was there . And he certainly couldn't have guessed that she would resist his demand for the gold or that she was not the yielding -- yes , and credible fool he had every right to expect . No , he had been surprised , unpleasantly surprised , but surprised . Then somebody else ? ? Don't question , Rev had said , don't invite danger . Her skin crawled : Lolotte had told Maude that she was in the hall and the door was open . Sarah had begun to tell Lucien of Emile , she had begun to question and a little draft had crept across the room from the bedroom door , open barely enough to show a rim of blackness in the hall . So Lolotte -- or anybody -- could have listened , and that somebody could have already been supplied with the missing bottle of opium . That was not reasonable either . The opium had disappeared before Emile's death and whoever shot him could not by any stretch of the imagination have foreseen Sarah's own doubts and suspicions -- and questions . She began to doubt whether there had been in fact a lethal dose of opium in the cup . So suppose somebody only wished to frighten her , so she would leave Honotassa ! ! That made a certain amount of logic . Added to the argument was the fact that while she might have tasted the coffee if it had been still hot , she might even have drunk some of it , she wouldn't have taken enough to kill her , for she would have been warned by its taste . No . It was merely an attempt to frighten her . She wouldn't go back to New York as Maude suggested ; ; she wouldn't run like a scared cat . But -- well , she'd be very careful . She dressed and the accustomed routine restored to her a sense of normal everyday life . But before she left her room she dug into her big moire bag , took out the envelope holding her marriage contract and the wax seal had been broken . So somebody else knew what would happen to her father's money if she died . Rev had known all along . Rev didn't need to break the wax seal , read the contract and find out . He could conceivably have wished to make sure ; ; Rev loved Honotassa , it was like a part of his breath and body ; ; Rev had stressed the need for money . Rev would never have tried to give her poison ! ! She thrust the envelope back in the bag ; ; there was no point in locking it up in the armoire now , it was like locking the barn after the horse was stolen . And in all likelihood , by now , there was more than one person in the house who knew the terms of her marriage contract . There was no point either in telling herself again what a fool she'd been . She went downstairs and received another curious shock , for when Glendora flapped into the dining room in her homemade moccasins , Sarah asked her when she had brought coffee to her room and Glendora said she hadn't . `` Too much work this morning , Miss Sarah -- everybody gone like that '' -- Sarah swallowed past another kind of constriction in her throat . `` Well , then who brought it '' ? ? `` Miss Maude . She come to the kitchen and say she take it up to you '' . Glendora put down a dish of lukewarm rice . `` Not much breakfast this morning . I don't know what we're going to do , Miss Sarah '' . `` We've got to eat '' , Sarah said , curtly , because a chill crawled over her again . Maude ? ? Glendora flapped away . The rice wasn't dosed with opium , indeed it had no taste at all , not a grain of salt . She ate what she could and went out along the covered passageway , with the rain dripping from the vines . In the kitchen Glendora was despairingly picking chickens . `` Get a basket '' , Sarah told her . `` We'll go to the storehouse '' . Glendora dropped a chicken and a flurry of feathers , and went with her through the drizzle , to the storehouse . Sarah found the right key and unlocked the door . It was a long , low room , like a root cellar , for it was banked up with soil , and vines had run rampant over that , too . It was dark but dry and cool . She doled out what Glendora vaguely guessed were the right amounts of dried peas , eggs , cornmeal , a little salt . The shelves looked emptier than when Miss Celie had shown her the storeroom , and since the men from the Commissary had called ; ; there were certainly now fewer mouths to feed but there was less to feed them with . She took Glendora to the smokehouse , unlocked it and saw with satisfaction there was still a quantity of hams and sides of bacon , hanging from the smoke-stained rafters . They wouldn't go hungry , not yet . And the fields were green and growing . `` Can't you possibly imagine what life is going to be like , here '' ? ? Maude had said . Maude . She sent Glendora back to the house , her basket and her apron laden . She stood for a moment , rain dripping from the trees over her head , thinking of Maude . Maude had the opportunity to take the bottle of opium from Sarah's room . Maude had the cool ruthlessness to do whatever she made up her mind to do . She couldn't see how her death could affect Maude . She couldn't see any reason why Maude would attempt to frighten her . Besides , there was something hysterical and silly , something almost childish about an attempt to frighten her . Maude was neither hysterical nor silly and Sarah rather doubted if she had ever been childish . Yet Maude had suggested that Sarah return to New York . Maude could have shot Emile -- if she'd had a reason to kill him . There was no use in standing there in the drizzle , trying to find a link between Emile's murder and opium in a cup of coffee . She started back for the house , saw a light in the office , opened the door and surprised a domestic little scene which was far outside the dark realm of murder or attempted murder . Rev , George and Lolotte were mending shoes . A lighted lamp stood on the table that dusky , drizzling day . They were all three bent over a shabby riding boot ; ; George had a tack hammer . Lolotte held a patch of leather , Rev steadied something , a tiny brad , waiting for George's poised hammer . George said , `` First thing I do when I get to Vicksburg again , is get me a Yankee '' -- `` With boots on '' , Lolotte laughed softly . Rev looked up and saw her . Lolotte looked up and stiffened . George didn't look up at all . There was no way to know , no way to guess whether any one of them was surprised at Sarah's appearance , believing her to be drugged and senseless -- and just possibly dead . Rev said , `` Come in , Sarah . Reckon you know the news '' . And what news , Sarah thought as satirically as Maude might have said it . Rev's face was suddenly a little fixed and questioning . He turned to George and Lolotte . `` Take your cobbler's shop somewhere else . I want to talk to Sarah '' . Everything in the office , the spreading circle of lamplight , the patch of leather in Lolotte's hands . George poised with the tack hammer , the homely , everyday atmosphere , all denied an attempt at murder . A rush of panic caught Sarah . `` No . Not now . I mean I've got to -- to see to the kitchen . Glendora '' -- Her words jumbled together and she all but ran from the office and from the question in Rev's face . Now why did I do that ? ? She thought as warm , drizzling rain touched her face . She was no schoolgirl , refusing to bear tales . As she reached the kitchen door the answer presented itself ; ; if she told anyone of the opium it must be Lucien , her husband . It might be , indeed it had already proved to be a marriage without love , but it was marriage . So she couldn't choose Rev as a confidant ; ; it must be Lucien . Always provided that Lucien himself had not dosed her coffee with opium , she thought , as coldly and sharply , again , as Maude might have said it . She paused at the kitchen door , caught her breath , told herself firmly that the opium was only an attempt to frighten her and went into the kitchen , where Glendora was eyeing the chickens dismally and Maude was cleaning lamp chimneys . Glendora gave a gulp . `` Miss Sarah , I can't cut up no chicken . Miss Maude say she won't '' . Again the homely , everyday details of daily living refuted a vicious attempt to frighten her -- or to murder her . The homely everyday details of living and domestic requirements also pressed upon her with their immediate urgency . No matter what had happened or hadn't happened , somebody had to see about dinner . She eyed the chickens with , if she had known it , something of Glendora's dismal look and thought with a certain fury of the time she had spent on Latin verbs . `` Not since last night . I didn't think there was any reason to '' . `` Maybe there isn't . Speak to him again anyway . Try talking to some of the fellows he works with , friends , anyone . Try to find out how happy he is with his wife , whether he plays around with women . You might try looking into his wife too . She might have been talking to some of her friends about her husband if they've been having any trouble '' . `` You think Black's the one we're looking for '' ? ? `` Yeah . I think he might be '' , Conrad said grimly . `` Then again he might not '' . `` What a stinking world '' , Rourke said . `` Black is Gilborn's best friend '' . `` I know '' . `` Will you be coming back soon '' ? ? `` I think so . I'm on my way to see the Jacobs woman '' . `` Gilborn's secretary ? ? What for ? ? You don't think Gilborn is the -- '' ? ? `` I don't think anything . I just don't want to go off half-cocked before picking up Black , that's all '' . Conrad interrupted . `` Gilborn says he was in his office all day with her yesterday . I'd like to make sure . Also , it's just possible she might know something about Mrs. Gilborn '' . `` Right . I'll see you later '' . `` Aren't you ever going to go home '' ? ? `` It sure as hell doesn't look like it , does it ? ? I'm telling you , if these corpses ever knew the trouble they put us to , they'd think twice before letting themselves get knocked off '' . `` Remember to tell that to the next corpse you meet '' . Conrad hung up and sat on the small telephone-booth bench , massaging his right leg . He looked at his watch . It was ten minutes before eleven . He wondered how long it would be before they had a signed confession from Lionel Black . Thirty years' experience let him know , even at this early stage , that Black was his man . But he still wanted to know why . It was a cold , windy day , the day after Kitti's death , but Stanley Gilborn paid no attention to the blustery October wind . After leaving Conrad , Gilborn had no destination . He simply walked , not noticing where he was , not caring . He stopped automatically at the street corners , waiting for the traffic lights to change , unheeding of other people , his coat open and flapping . As he walked , he tried to think . Of Kitti . Of himself . Mainly of what Conrad had tried to make him believe . There was nothing coherent about his thinking . It was a succession of picture-images passing through his mind : the same ones , different ones , in no apparent sequence , in no logical succession . The enormity of what Conrad had told him made it impossible for Gilborn to accept , with any degree of realism , the actuality of it . Conrad's words had intellectual meaning for him only . Emotionally , they penetrated him not at all . Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . Gilborn remembered Conrad's exact words . They made sense and yet they didn't . He knew Conrad had told him the truth . It was so . Yet it wasn't so . It wasn't so because it couldn't be so . When Kitti was alive -- and he remembered the pressure of her hand resting lightly on his arm -- she had been the center of his life . She was the sun , he the closest planet orbiting around her , the rest of the world existing and visible yet removed . For fifty-five years he had lived , progressing towards a no-goal , eating , working , breathing without plan , without reason . Kitti had come along to justify everything . She was his goal , she was his reason . He had lived all his life waiting for her . Not once , in the time that he had known her , had he ever considered the possibility , not once , not for one one-thousandth of a second , of her infidelity . He could not consider it now . Not really . And so he walked , aimless again . The walk ended , inevitably , right in front of his hotel building . The doorman began to nod his head automatically , then remembered who Gilborn was , what had happened to him the night before . He looked at Gilborn with undisguised curiosity . Gilborn passed by him without seeing him . He crossed the lobby and rode up in the elevator lost in his own thoughts . In the apartment itself , all was still . The police were no longer there . There was no evidence that anything was different than it had been . Except that Kitti wasn't there . Without taking off his coat , he sat in the blue chair which still faced the closed bedroom door . At last , sitting there , in the familiar surroundings , the truth began to sink in . Who ? ? He felt no anger towards Kitti , no sense that she had betrayed him . Who ? ? She was all he had , everything he had , everything he wanted . Someone had taken her away from him . Who ? ? Where there is a left-hand entry in the ledger , there is a right-hand one , he remembered from his school days . Where there is a victim , there is a killer . Who ? ? Whoever he was and your wife were intimate . He rose from the chair , took off his coat . Quickly , he went into the bedroom . The bed still showed signs of where Kitti had lain . Gilborn stood there for a long time . He looked at the bed unblinkingly . The bed was empty now . Kitti would lie in it no more . He would lie in it no more . Gilborn wondered whether Kitti had lain in that same bed with Who ? ? For thirty minutes , Stanley Gilborn stood there . At the end of the half-hour , racking his brains , thinking over and over again of Kitti , her friends , her past , he left the bedroom . Who ? ? He could think of no answer . Gilborn put on his coat again . Before leaving , he took one last , lingering look at the apartment . He knew he would never see it again . In the street , walking as quickly as he could , Stanley Gilborn was a lone figure . On Blanche Jacobs , Kitti Gilborn's death had a quite different effect . For Blanche , Kitti's death was a source of guilty , but nonetheless soaring , happy hope . In Blanche's defense , it must be said she was unaware of the newborn hope . If anyone had asked her , she would have described herself only as nervous and worried . The figures on the worksheet paper in front of her were jumping and waving around so badly it was all she could do to make them out clearly enough to copy them with the typewriter . She wondered whether Stanley would call . She wanted to be with him , to give him the comfort and companionship she knew he needed . She had skipped her lunch hour in the fear that he might call while she was out . He hadn't . And now she was feeling sick , both from concern about Stanley and hunger . Why hadn't he called ? ? Men , she reflected , even men like Stanley , are unpredictable . She tried to think of his unpredictable actions in the eleven years she had known him and discovered they weren't so many after all . Stanley really was quite predictable . That was one of the things she liked about Stanley . He wasn't like so many other men . The dentist last night , for instance . Dinner and the movies had been fine . He had taken her upstairs to say good night . She had invited him in for coffee . It was in the kitchen , as she was watching the kettle , waiting for the water to boil , that he had grabbed for her . Without warning , without giving her a chance to prepare for it . From behind , he had put his arms on her shoulders , turned her around , and pressed her to him , so close she couldn't breathe . Later , she apologized for the long scratch across his face , tried to explain she couldn't help herself , that the panic arose in her unwanted . But he hadn't understood . When he left , she knew she would never see him again . Stanley wasn't like that . She could always predict what Stanley was going to do , ever since she first met him . Except for that one morning . The morning he walked in to announce to her , blushing , that he was married . She thought she was going to die . She had assumed before then that one day he would ask her to marry him . Blanche couldn't remember when she had first arrived at this conclusion . She thought it was sometime during the second week she worked for Stanley . It was nothing that he said or did , but it seemed so natural to her that she should be working for him , looking forward to his eventual proposal . She was thirty-one years old then . Her mother was already considerably concerned over her daughter's future . But Blanche had been able to maintain a serene and assured composure in the face of her widowed mother's continued carping , had been able to resist her urgings to date anyone who offered the slightest possibility of matrimony . For Blanche , it was only a matter of time before Stanley would propose . It was to be expected that Stanley would be shy , slow in taking such a momentous step . Stanley went along in life , she knew , convinced that he deserved the love and faith of no woman . As a result , he never looked for it . But one day , she expected , he would somehow discover , without her having to tell him , that there was such a woman in the world ; ; a woman who was willing to give him love , faith , and anything else a woman could give a husband . Indeed , there was a woman who , unasked , had already given him love . Unquestionably , Blanche loved Stanley . And then , unexpectedly , Stanley made his announcement . On that first day , Blanche literally thought she was going to die , or , at the very least , go out of her mind . It might have been easier for her if Kitti Walker hadn't been everything that Blanche was not . Kitti was thirty years younger than Stanley , taller than Stanley , prettier than Stanley had any right to hope for , much less expect . Kitti could have married a score of men . There was no reason for her to marry someone like Stanley Gilborn , there was no need for her to marry Stanley . Kitti had come into the office , on somebody's recommendation , because she needed help in preparing her income tax return . Stanley had filled out the return and because , when he was finished , it was close to the lunch hour , he had politely asked Kitti to join him , never expecting her to accept . Blanche knew all this because the door to Stanley's office was open and , without straining too hard , she could hear everything that was said . Stanley had gone out , saying he would be back in an hour . He hadn't come back for over two . After that day , Blanche still didn't know exactly what had happened . There were mornings when Stanley came in late , afternoons when he left early , days when he didn't come in at all . Blanche knew something must be causing Stanley's new , strange behavior but she never once connected it with Kitti Walker . It was too unprecedented . Then , six weeks after the day Kitti first came into the office , Stanley announced he and Kitti were married . Somehow , Blanche managed to cover the stunned surprise and offer her congratulations . That night the two of them left for a week's honeymoon in Acapulco . While they were away Blanche came into the office every morning , running things as she had always run them for Stanley , going through the week in a dazed stupor , getting things done automatically , out of habit . For exactly one week , she was able to continue in this manner . On the morning of Stanley's return , however , her strength left her . Two hours of watching his serenely happy face , listening to his soft humming as he bent over his penciled figures , and Blanche had to leave . She stayed away for ten days . Those ten days were like no others that Blanche had known . Mostly , she stayed in bed . She didn't tell anyone , even her mother , what was wrong . She refused to have a doctor , insisting there was nothing a doctor could do for her . `` Right '' , said the fingerprint man . `` Also , if you're going to believe those prints , you'll have to look for a killer who's a top-grade piano player '' . He demonstrated by playing an imaginary piano , doing a staccato passage with a broadly exaggerated attack . To make it clearer he shifted to acting out , but with no change of manner , the killing of Rose Mallory . His hands snatched at an imaginary bucket , swooping down hard to grab it and coming away with equal snap like a ball that's been bounced hard . In the same way he pantomimed grasping a mantel and bouncing cleanly off that , pressing his hands against the floor and bouncing cleanly off that . He was moving like a ballet dancer , playing for laughs . If Rose Mallory's killer acted this way , catching up with him was going to be a cinch . We'd know him by his stretch pants and the flowers he'd wear twined in his hair . Perhaps if Felix had first come upon us when this boy was not cavorting so gaily up and down the hall outside the murdered woman's apartment , we might have had less trouble convincing Felix of our seriousness . This , you will remember , was still New Year's Day . By the time Felix turned up it was early afternoon , which , one would think , would be late enough so that by then , except for small children and a few hardy souls who had not yet sobered up , it could have been expected that people would no longer be having any sort of active interest in the previous night's noisemakers and paper hats . Felix was the exception . He had retained his hat and his horn , and , whatever fun might still be going , he was ready to join it . That , incidentally , might give you some idea of what Felix was like . After all , he hadn't happened upon us in that second-floor hall without warning . The M.E.'s boys had finished their on-the-spot examination and the body had been removed for autopsy . The meat wagon , therefore , was not out in front of the house any more , but the cluster of squad cars was still there and there was a cop on the door downstairs to screen any comings and goings . There was , furthermore , the crowd of curious onlookers gathered in the street and a couple more cops to hold them at a decent distance . Just put yourself in Felix's place for a moment . You're a taxpayer , householder , landlord . You've been away from home for the New Year festivities , but now the party is over and you come home . Defining sobriety in the limited sense of being free from the clinical symptoms of the effects of alcohol ingested and not yet eliminated from the system , you are sober . You still have your paper hat and you're wearing it , but then , it is an extraordinary paper hat and , in addition to anything else you may be , you are also the sculptor who created that most peculiar dame out in the back yard . It's not too much to assume that you will have a more lasting interest in paper hats than will Mr. Average Citizen . You have your paper horn clutched in your big , craggy fist , and for your entrance you have planned a noisy , colorful and exuberant greeting to your friends and tenants . You find your house a focus of public and police attention . Can you imagine yourself forgetting under the circumstances that you are approaching this startling and unexpected situation so unsuitably hatted and armed with a paper horn ? ? Maybe one could be startled into forgetfulness . You shoulder your way through the cluster of the curious and you barge up to the cop on the door . You identify yourself and ask him what's going on . Instead of answering you , he sticks his head in the door and shouts up the stairs . `` Got the upstairs guy '' , he bellows . `` The owner . Do I send him up '' ? ? Then he turns back to you . `` Go on in '' , he says . `` They'll tell you what's cooking '' . Even then , as you go into the house oppressed by the knowledge that something is cooking and that your house has passed under this unaccountable , official control , could you go on forgetting that you still had that ridiculous hat on your head and you were still carrying that childish horn in your hand ? ? What I'm getting at is that we were fully prepared for Felix's being an odd one . We'd seen his handiwork out in the back yard , and the little his tenants had told us of him did make him sound a little special . We were not , however , prepared for anything like the apparition that confronted us as Felix came up the stairs . He , of course , must have been equally unprepared for what confronted him , but , nonetheless , I did find his reaction startling . If Felix was still wearing the hat and carrying the horn because he'd forgotten about them , he now remembered . He came bounding up the stairs and joined the dance . He adjusted the hat , lifted the horn to his lips as though it were a flute , and fell in alongside our fingerprint expert to cavort with him . Our man stopped dead and glowered at Felix . Felix threw his head back and laughed a laugh that shook the timbers of even that solidly built old house . This was a bull of a man . He was big-chested , big-shouldered and heavy-armed . His face was ruddy and heavy and unlined , and when he laughed he showed his teeth , which were big and white and strong and unquestionably home-grown . I don't remember ever seeing teeth that were quite so white and at the same time quite so emphatically not dentures . His hair had receded most of the way to the back of his neck . He had only a fringe of hair and he wore it cropped short . It was almost as white as his teeth . For a man of his mass he was curiously short . He wasn't a dwarf but he was a bit of a comic figure . A man with so big and so staggeringly developed a torso and such long and powerful arms is expected to stand taller than five feet five . For Felix it was a bit of a stretch to make even that measurement . The man was just this side of being a freak . We waited till he had finished laughing , and that gave us a few moments for taking stock of him . He was dressed in a manner Esquire might suggest for the outdoor man's country weekend . Dark gray sports jacket , lighter gray slacks , pink flannel shirt , black silk necktie . His eyes were clear . He was freshly shaved , and if there had been any alcohol in him we could never have missed detecting some scent of it on the massive gusts of his laughter . Not even a whiff . Eventually he subsided . `` Felix '' ? ? Gibby said . `` Me '' , he said merrily . `` Me , the happy one '' . `` That much Latin we remember '' , Gibby said dryly . `` You always live up to your name , always like this , always making happy '' ? ? `` I try '' , Felix said blithely . `` The world is full of blokes who put their hearts into making the tragic scene . I've never noticed that it improves things any '' . `` Bully for you '' , Gibby said . `` What's the rest of your name '' ? ? `` No rest of it . Felix is all there is '' . `` All there ever was '' ? ? `` The past I leave to historians '' , Felix intoned , demonstrating that he could be pompous as well as happy . `` You live in the present '' ? ? `` In the present '' , Felix proclaimed . `` For the future . Is there any other time in which a man can live '' ? ? `` We '' , Gibby announced , `` are not philosophers . We are Assistant District Attorneys . This gentleman is a police officer . He is a fingerprint specialist . Could your future , your immediate future , be made to include taking us upstairs , giving us a bit of space in which our friend can work , and making available to him your finger tips '' ? ? The happy one could never have looked happier . This was more than joy . It was ecstasy . `` Those lovely whorls '' , he chortled . `` So intricate , so beautiful . Come right along . I love fingerprints '' . He was prancing along the hall , heading for the next flight of stairs . Gibby called him back . `` We're here because of what happened last night '' , he said . `` Past , yes , but important . Since it is important , for the record let's have the full name '' . `` That important '' ? ? Felix asked . `` That important '' . `` Grubb '' , Felix whispered . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? Gibby asked , not bothering to whisper . `` Shh '' , Felix implored . `` I can't see what would make it necessary for you to know . Nothing could make it necessary to proclaim it to the whole world '' . Obligingly Gibby lowered his voice . `` Felix Grubb '' ? ? He repeated . `` No . Edmund , but not for years . For years it's been just Felix . First thing I did after my twenty-first birthday was go into court and have it officially changed , and this is something I don't tell everybody . That was almost forty years ago '' . Having volunteered that he was a man of about sixty , he bounded up the stairs and with each leap rendered the number less credible . This was a broth of a boy , our Felix , and nothing was more obvious than the joy he took in demonstrating how agile he was and how full of juice and spirit . We followed him up the stairs . The cops would gather up Connor and the foursome on the third floor and bring us those of them who would voluntarily submit to fingerprinting . You may think we didn't need Nancy and Jean , but you always get what you can when you can , and we had no guarantee that a fingerprint record on them couldn't be useful before we were through with this case . Also , if we had excluded the ladies we would have to that extent let the whole world know at least that much of where we stood . The killer , if in our present group , would certainly be interested in knowing that much , and even though with the fingerprint evidence what it was I could see no way he could use this bit of information to improve on his situation , there might always be some way . If you can possibly avoid it , you don't hand out any extra chances . Felix took us into his studio . It was that oddly shaped space at the very top of the house , where ceiling heights had to accommodate themselves to the varying angles of roof slope . At each angle of its pitch a big skylight had been fitted into the roof and all these skylights were fitted with systems of multiple screens and shades . When Felix first opened the door on it , all these shades were tightly drawn and the whole studio was as dark as night . He quickly fixed that , rolling back the shades on some of the skylights and adjusting screens on the others . He flew about the place making these adjustments and it was obvious that what he was doing was the fruit of long experience . None of his movements was tentative . There was no process of trial and error . Starting with the room completely blacked out , as it was when we came in , he unerringly fixed things so that the whole place was bathed in the maximum of light without at any point admitting even so much as a crack of glare . Expecting something more-than-average wacky , I was surprised by what we found . There was no display of either works in progress or of finished work . Here and there on work table or pedestal stood a shape with a sheet or a tarpaulin draped over it . These shapes might have been mad , but there was no telling . They were all completely shrouded . The equipment was solid and heavy and in good condition . Everything was orderly and it seemed to be arranged for the workman's comfort , convenience and efficiency . There were tools about but they were neatly kept . There was no confusion and no litter . Supplies of sheet metal were neatly stacked in bins . Andy did not see the newspapers the next day . Someone on his staff -- he suspected it was Ed Thornburg -- intercepted them and for this Andy was grateful . He finally fell asleep around six in the morning with the aid of a sleeping capsule , a crutch he rarely used , and didn't awaken until early afternoon . Memory flooded him the instant he opened his eyes and the sick feeling knotted his stomach . Outside his window bloomed a beautiful summer day . Presumably the same sun was shining upon little Drew also , and those who had kidnapped him . But where ? ? It was still a very big world , despite all the modern cant to the contrary . Hub was sitting in a chair that blocked the hall door . He was dozing , perhaps the only sleep he'd gotten . He snapped to alertness at Andy's entrance . `` Sorry , Mr. Paxton . Nothing new . Lot of people waiting to see you , though '' . `` Reporters '' ? ? `` Our own people . Questions about the show tonight '' . Hub picked up the telephone . `` Shall I let them know you're awake '' ? ? `` I suppose . How's Lissa , do you know '' ? ? Hub considered . `` Some better . She's got plenty of guts , Mr. Paxton . You want me to call her '' ? ? `` She expecting me to '' ? ? Hub shook his head so Andy told him not to bother . The only reason for contacting Lissa was to comfort or to be comforted . He could not manage the former or expect the latter ; ; they had nothing to give to each other . The omission might look peculiar to outsiders , but Andy could not bring himself to go through the motions simply for the sake of appearances . He had little time to himself , anyway . As the afternoon sped toward evening , the suite saw a steady procession of Paxton aides pass in and out , each with his own special problem . Thornburg arrived with the writers . They had spent the morning revising the act , eliminating all the gay songs , patter and dancing with a view of the best public relations . What remained lacked the original verve but it was at least dignified , as befitting the tragic circumstances . Raymond Fox reported that the orchestra had hastily rehearsed `` Cradle Song '' in case it was needed . Charlie Marble was back and forth on several occasions , first to confer with Andy on the advisability of cancelling the Las Vegas engagement -- they decided it was wise -- and later to announce that a prominent comedian , also an agency client , had agreed to fill the casino's open date . And once Bake slipped in , pale and drawn , last night's liquor still on his breath with some of today's added to it . He asked if there was anything he could do . Andy invented a job to keep him busy , sending him ahead to El Dorado to supervise last minute arrangements . But from Rocco Vecchio , they heard nothing . At last it was time to depart . Hub , nosing about , spotted reporters in the lobby , so Andy was hustled away quietly through the hotel's service entrance in a strange car which Hub had procured somewhere . They succeeded in eluding the curious at the hotel , but there was no chance of avoiding them at the nightclub . El Dorado was surrounded by a mob . They overflowed the parking lot , making progress by automobile difficult . Long before he reached the protection of the stage door , Andy was recognized . Word of his arrival spread through the crowd like a brushfire . They surged around him , fingers pointing , eyes prying . It was not a hostile gathering but Andy sensed the difference from last night's hero-worshippers . They had come not to admire but to observe . `` It's worse inside '' , Thornburg informed Andy . `` Skolman's jammed in every table he could find . Under the heading of it's an ill wind , et cetera '' . Backstage was tomblike by contrast . Andy's co-workers kept their distance , awed by the tragedy . But in his dressing room was a large bouquet and a card that read , `` We're with you all the way '' . It was signed by everyone in the troupe . Andy couldn't help but be touched . He instructed Shirl Winter to compose a note of thanks to be posted on the call board . Bake was waiting to report that Lou DuVol had been sobered up to the point where he could function efficiently . Andy gathered that this had been no small accomplishment . Bake himself looked better ; ; any kind of job was better than brooding . Andy told him , `` Bake , I wish you'd talk to Skolman , see if some kind of p. a. system can be rigged up outside . It's just barely possible with this crowd that the kidnapper wasn't able to get a table . I wouldn't want him to miss the message '' . `` I'll try . Skolman isn't going to like it much , though , giving away what he should be selling '' . Skolman wasn't the only one who didn't care for Andy's scheme . A short time later , Lieutenant Bonner stomped into the dressing room . `` I got a bone to pick with you , Mr. Paxton . It's those damn loudspeakers '' . Andy rolled up the revised script he had been studying . `` What about them '' ? ? `` They're going to louse me up good . My men have been here all afternoon , setting up for this thing '' . Bonner explained that , with the nightclub's cooperation , the police had occupied El Dorado like a battlefield . Motion picture cameras had been installed to film the audience , the reservation list was being checked out name by name , and a special detail was already at work in the parking lot scrutinizing automobiles for a possible lead . However , it was virtually impossible to screen the mob outside , even if Bonner had manpower available for the purpose . `` I want you to have the speakers taken out '' . Andy sighed . `` Seems like we're never going to see eye to eye , Lieutenant . Didn't they tell you what I wanted the p. a. system for '' ? ? `` Sure , I know . But it's such a long shot '' -- `` No longer than yours . What do you expect to get tonight , anyway ? ? You think somebody is going to stand up in the audience and make guilty faces ? ? Or have a sign on his car that says , ' Here Comes the Paxton Kidnapper ' '' ? ? Andy crumbled the script in his fist . `` I can't stop you from doing what you think is right . But don't try to stop me , either '' . `` Someday '' , Bonner said , `` you're going to ask us for help . I can hardly wait '' . `` What you don't understand is that I'm asking for it now '' . But Bonner departed , still full of ill will . He had gotten stuck with a job too big for his imagination ; ; he had to cling to routine , tested procedures . To act otherwise would be to admit his helplessness . But , admit or not , Bonner was helpless . The crime showed too much planning , the kidnappers appeared too proficient to be caught by a checklist . Andy's performance was scheduled for eleven o'clock . He stalled for a half-hour longer , hoping to hear something from Vecchio about the ransom money . Bake and Shirl Winter , on separate telephones , could not reach him at any conceivable location in Los Angeles , nor could they secure any clear-cut information regarding his efforts . Bake cursed . `` The sweaty bastard's probably halfway to Peru with our money by now '' . When no one smiled , he felt constrained to add , `` Just kidding , natch '' . Thornburg popped in to advise , `` Andy , Skolman's sending up smoke signals . You about ready '' ? ? `` What's he complaining about '' ? ? Bake asked . `` They're drinking , aren't they '' ? ? `` No . We got a bunch of sippers out there tonight . I guess nobody wants to pass out and miss anything '' . Thornburg added in a lower voice but Andy overheard , `` They act more like a jury than an audience '' . Andy said , `` Well , I guess we can't wait any longer . Hub , you stick by the stage door . If Rock shows up during the number -- or you hear anything -- give me the signal '' . Shirl Winter said , `` I'll stay on the phone , Mr. Paxton . There's a couple of call-backs I can work on '' . `` You're a sweetheart -- but leave one line open . He may try to phone us '' . Andy passed into the corridor , their `` good lucks '' ! ! Following him . It was what they said before every performance but tonight it sounded different , as if he really needed it . They were right . The act , cut to shreds and hastily patched together during the afternoon , had not been rehearsed sufficiently by anyone . The result had nothing of the polish , pace or cohesion of the previous night . Here's where luck would normally step in . But this was no ordinary show and Andy knew it . Whether he sang well or badly had nothing to do with it . The audience had come not to be entertained but to judge . Twenty-four hours had changed him from a performer to a freak . Within this framework , what followed was strained , even macabre . Eliminating the patter and the upbeat numbers left little but blues and other songs of equal melancholy . The effect was as depressing as a gravestone , the applause irresolute and short-lived . Yet Andy plowed ahead , mouthing the inconsequential words as if they possessed real meaning , and gradually his listeners warmed to him . Their clapping grew more fervent ; ; the evening was still not beyond salvaging , not as a show but for him as a person . The worst was yet to come . As Andy reached the finale of his act , a subdued commotion backstage drew his attention to the wings . Rocco Vecchio -- a perspiring , haggard Vecchio -- was standing there , flanked by two men in the uniforms of armored transport guards . Vecchio was nodding and pointing at the large suitcase he held . Andy felt his heart thud heavily with relief . He waved at Fox to cut off the finale introduction . The music died away discordantly . He drew a deep breath . `` Ladies and gentlemen , in place of my regular closing number tonight , I'd like to sing something of a different nature for you . Ray , if you please -- the ' Cradle Song ' '' . He sensed rather than heard the gasp that swept across the audience . Nor could he blame them . This particular song at this particular time could only be interpreted as the ultimate in bad taste , callous exploitation beyond the bounds of decency . Having no choice , he plunged into it , anyway , holding onto the microphone for support . `` Lullaby and goodnight . '' His voice shook . For the first time in his life he forgot the lyrics midway through and had to cover up by humming the rest . He wondered if the audience would let him finish . They did ; ; though contemptuous , they were still polite . But when he was finally through , their scorn was made apparent . Someone clapped tentatively then quickly stopped . Otherwise , the silence was complete . As the lights came up , Andy could see that a number of patrons were already on their way toward the exit . He stumbled off-stage . `` My God '' , he muttered . `` My God '' . Hub was there to support him . `` It's okay , Mr. Paxton . The money's here , all of it '' . At this moment , all he could think of was what he'd been forced to undergo . `` Did you hear them ? ? Do you know what they think of me '' ? ? `` Bunch of damn jerks '' , Hub growled . `` Who needs them '' ? ? Thornburg patted his arm . `` Sure , Andy , it'll be all right . Nothing broken that can't be mended '' . The words were hollow . Thornburg knew , better than any of them , that a public image was as fragile as Humpty Dumpty . All the king's horses and all the king's men Vecchio shouldered in . `` I got it , Andy . God knows how , but I got it . You'll never believe the places I've been today . I practically had to sign your life away , you'll probably fire me for some of the deals I had to go for , but '' -- Andy nodded dully . `` It doesn't matter , Rock . We've done our part '' . He clutched that knowledge to him as he returned to his dressing room . The usual congratulatory crowd was conspicuously absent ; ; the place had the air of a morgue . Andy had no desire to linger himself but Hub reported that the mob outside was still large despite the efforts of the police to disperse them . His son watched until he got as far as the hall , almost out of sight , then hurried after . `` Dad . Dad , wait '' . He caught up with the old man in the living room . Old man Arthur had put down the suitcase to open the front door . `` Just this one favor , Dad . Just don't tell Ferguson that crazy opinion of yours '' . `` Why not '' ? ? The old man gave the room a stare in leaving ; ; under the scraggly brows the pale old eyes burned with a bitter memory . `` It's the truth '' . `` The Bartlett girl was killed by Mr. Dronk's son . Rossi and Ferguson have been across the street , talking to the kid . They've found some sort of new evidence , a bundle of clothes or something , and it must link the kid even stronger to the crime . Why won't you accept facts ? ? The two kids were together a lot , they were having some kind of teen-age affair -- God knows how far that had gone -- and the kid's crippled . He limps , and the man who hit you and took the cane , he limped . My God , how much more do you want '' ? ? His father looked him over closely . `` You sound like an old woman . You should have gone to work today , 'stead of sneaking around spying on the Dronk house '' . `` Now , see here '' -- `` The trouble with you '' , old man Arthur began , and then checked himself . Young Mrs. Arthur had opened the oven and there was a drifting odor of hot biscuits . The old man opened the door and stepped out into the sunlight . `` Isn't enough time to go into it '' , he finished , and slammed the door in his son's face . Mrs. Holden turned from the window draperies . `` They found something else up there '' , she said half-aloud to the empty room . `` They took it away , overalls or something '' . She walked restlessly across the room , then back to the windows . `` Now they've gone , they didn't come back , and they didn't arrest that Dronk boy '' . She stood frowning and chewing her lip . She was wearing a brown cotton dress , cut across the hips in a way that was supposed to make her look slimmer , a yoke set into the skirt and flaring pleats below . She smoothed the skirt , sat down , then stood up and went back to the windows . `` Why on earth did I send him off to work ? ? There was excuse enough to keep him home that young Mr. Arthur's still over there '' . With sudden energy , she went to the phone and rang Holden's office and asked for him . `` I think you had better come home '' . `` Mae , we're so busy . Mr. Crosson's been on everybody's neck , an order he expected didn't come through and he's '' -- `` I don't care . I want you here . I'm all alone and certain things are going on that look very ominous . I need someone to go out and find out what's happening '' . `` But I couldn't do that , even if I were home '' ! ! His voice grew high and trembling . `` I can't be underfoot every time those cops turn around ! ! They'll they'll think I did something '' . He couldn't see the grin that split her mouth ; ; the teeth that shone into the phone were like a shark's . `` You'll just have to risk it . You can't wander along in the dark , can you ? ? I'd think that you even more than I would be wondering what they're up to . They found some clothes '' , she tossed in . `` What '' ? ? Deliberately , she ignored the yelp . `` Also , that Mr. Ferguson was here . I guess he wants to ask you some questions . I stalled him off . He doesn't expect you until five '' . `` Then I'd better wait until five '' . `` No-o-o . Come home right away '' . She slapped the receiver into its holder and stepped away . Her eyes were bright with anticipation . In his office , Mr. Holden replaced the phone slowly . He rose from his chair . He had to cough then ; ; he went to the window and choked there with the fresh breeze on his face . He got his hat out of the closet . For a moment he thought of going into Crosson's office to explain that he had to leave , but there was now such a pain in his chest , such a pounding in his head , that he decided to let it go . He passed the receptionist in the outer office , muttering , `` I've got to go out for a little while '' . Let her call Crosson if she wanted to , let Crosson raise the roof or even can him , he didn't care . He got into the car . Putting the key into the switch , pressing the accelerator with his foot , putting the car into reverse , seemed vast endeavors almost beyond the ability of his shaking body . Once out in the street , the traffic was a gadfly maze in which he wandered stricken . When he turned into the highway that led to the outskirts of the city and then rose toward home , he had to pull over to the curb and wait for a few minutes , sucking in air and squinting and blinking his eyes to clear them of tears . What on earth was in Mae's mind , that she wanted him up there spying on what the cops were doing ? ? What did she think he could do ? ? He tried to ignore what his own common sense told him , but it wasn't possible ; ; her motives were too blatant . She wanted him to get into trouble . She wanted the police to notice him , suspect him . She was going to keep on scheming , poking , prodding , suggesting , and dictating until the cops got up enough interest in him to go back to their old neighborhood and ask questions . And he knew in that moment , with a cold sinking of despair , a dying of old hopes , that Mae had spread some kind of word there among the neighbors . Nothing bald , open ; ; but enough . They'd have some suspicions to repeat to the police . Though his inner thoughts cringed at it , he forced himself to think back , recreating the scene in which Mae claimed to have caught him molesting the child . It hadn't amounted to anything . There had been nothing evil or dirty in his intentions . A second scene flashed before his mind , the interior of the garage at the new house and the young Bartlett girl turning startled to meet him , the dim dark and the sudden confusion and fear and then the brightness as Mae had clicked on the light . Suppose the cops somehow got hold of that ? ? Well , it hadn't been what it seemed , he'd had no idea the girl was in there . He hadn't touched her . And when he came to examine the scene , there was a certain staginess to it , it had the smell of planning , and a swift suspicion darted into his mind . Too monstrous , of course . Mae wouldn't have plotted a thing like that . It was just that little accidents played into her hands . Like this murder . He leaned on the wheel , clutching it , staring into the sunlight , and tried to bring order into his thoughts . He felt light-headed and sick . There was no use wandering off into a territory of utter nightmare . Mae was his wife . She was married to him for better or for worse . She wouldn't be wilfully planning his destruction . But she was . She was . Even as the conviction of truth roared through him , shattering his last hope of safety , he was reaching to release the hand brake , to head up the road for home , doing her bidding . He drove , and the road wobbled , familiar scenes crept past on either side . He came to a stretch of old orange groves , the trees dead , some of them uprooted , and then there was an outlying shopping area , and tract houses . He had the feeling that he should abandon the car and run off somewhere to hide . But he couldn't imagine where . There was really no place to go , finally , except home to Mae . At the gate he slowed , looking around . Cooper was beside his car , on the curb at the right , just standing there morosely ; ; he didn't even look up . Behind him on the steps of the little office sat old man Arthur ; ; he was straight , something angry in his attitude , as if he might be waiting to report something . Holden stepped on the gas . A new idea drifted in from nowhere . He could go to the police . He could tell them his fears of being involved , he could explain what had happened in the old neighborhood and how Mae had misunderstood and how she had held it over him -- the scene was complete in his mind at the moment , even to his own jerkings and snivelings , and Ferguson's silent patience . He could throw himself on the mercy of the Police Department . It wasn't what Mae would want him to do , though . He was sure of this . Once he had abandoned himself to the very worst , once he had quieted all the dragons of worry and suspense , there wouldn't be very much for Mae to do . At that moment , Holden almost slammed on the brakes to go back to Cooper and ask if Ferguson was about . It would be such a relief . What was that old sign , supposed to be painted over a door somewhere , Abandon hope , all ye who enter here ? ? Why , Holden said to himself , surprised at his own sudden insight , I'll bet some of those people who enter are just as happy as can be . They've worried , they've lain awake nights , they've shook at the slightest footstep , they've pictured their own destruction , and now it's all over and they can give up . Sure , they're giving up hope . Hand in hand with hope went things like terror and apprehension . Good-bye . Holden waved a hand at the empty street . Glad to see you go . He drove into the paved space before the garage and got out , slamming the car door . He looked up and down the street . If Ferguson's car had been in sight , Holden would have walked directly to it . He went to the front door and opened it and looked in . Mae entered the room from the hallway to the kitchen . She had a cup of something steaming , coffee perhaps , in one hand , a fresh piece of toast in the other . She stood there , watching Holden come in , and she put the piece of toast in her mouth and bit off one corner with a huge chomp of her white teeth . `` Mae '' -- `` I've been thinking '' , she said , swallowing the toast . `` Didn't you have an old pair of painting overalls in the garage ? ? You used them that time you painted the porch at our other house . And then you wiped up some grease '' . She had caught him off guard , no preparation , nothing certain but that ahead lay some kind of disaster . `` No . Wait a minute . What do you '' -- `` I've been looking for them , and they're gone . I'm sure they were in the garage up until a couple of days ago . Or even yesterday . You used to paint in them , and then you just took them for rags . The police have them now '' . `` I don't remember any overalls at all '' . `` They were all faded . Worn through at the knees '' . She stood sipping and chewing and watching . `` Green paint , wasn't it ? ? Well , I'm not sure of the color . But you had them '' . `` Mae , sit down . Put down the cup of coffee . Tell me what this is all about '' . She shook her head . She took another bite of toast . Holden noticed almost absently how she chewed , how the whole side of her cheek moved , a slab of fat that extended down into her neck . `` My goodness , you ought to remember if I do . You're going to have to go to the police and explain what happened . Tell them the truth or something before they come here '' . A seeping coldness entered Holden's being ; ; his nerves seemed frost-bitten down to the tips of his tingling fingers and his spine felt stiff and glass-like , liable to break like an icicle at any moment . `` I've never owned any painting overalls . A man with a sketch pad in hand sat with a large pink woman in a small office at the end of a long , dim corridor and made pencil lines on paper and said , `` Is this more like it , Mrs. MacReady ? ? Or are the eyebrows more like this '' ? ? When he had finished with that , he would go to another part of the hotel and say much the same things to someone else , most probably a busboy . `` Begin to look like him now , would you say ? ? Different about the mouth , huh ? ? More like this , maybe '' ? ? Men blew dust on objects in a room on the seventeenth floor of the Hotel Dumont and blew it off again , and did the same in a tiny , almost airless room in a tenement in the West Forties . And men also used vacuum cleaners in both rooms , sucking dust up once more . Men from the Third Detective District , Eighteenth Precinct , had the longest , the most tedious , job . At the Hotel Dumont there had , at the time in issue , been twenty-three overnighters , counting couples as singular . These included , as one , Mr. and Mrs. Anthony Payne , who had checked in a little after noon the day before , and had not checked out together . But Gardner Willings was not included ; ; he had been at the Dumont for almost a week . There was , of course , no special reason to believe that the man or woman they sought had stayed only overnight at the hotel . The twenty-three ( or twenty-two with the Paynes themselves omitted ) provided merely a place to start , and their identification was the barest of starts . With names and addresses listed , verification came next . It would take time ; ; it would , almost inevitably , trouble some water . ( `` I certainly was not at the Dumont last night and my husband couldn't have been . He's in Boston . Of course he's in '' -- ) The Hotel King Arthur across the street provided almost twice as many problems . The King Arthur offered respectable and convenient lodgings to people from the suburbs who wanted to see a show and didn't want -- heaven knew didn't want ! ! -- to lunge anxiously through crowded streets to railroad stations and , at odd hours of night , drive from smaller stations to distant homes , probably through rain or , in November , something worse . The King Arthur was less expensive than the Dumont . The King Arthur had fifty-four overnighters , again counting rooms rather than people . Check the overnighters out . Failing to find what was wanted , as was most likely , check out other guests , with special -- but not exclusive -- attention to those with rooms on the street . ( Anyone active enough can reach a roof , wherever his room may be . ) And know , while all this went on , that there was no real reason to suppose that the murderer had been a guest in either hotel . It was not even certain the shot had been fired from either hotel . There were other roofs , less convenient but not impossible . It is dull business , detecting , and hard on feet . There was also the one salient question to ask , and ask widely : Did you notice anything out of the way ? ? Like , for example , a man carrying a twenty-two rifle , probably with a telescopic sight attached ? ? There was , of course , no hope it really would be that simple . The sniper , whether psychopathic marksman or murderer by intent , would hardly have walked to his vantage point with rifle over shoulder , whistling a marching tune . Anybody carrying anything that might hide a rifle ? ? Long thin suitcase ? ? Or long fat suitcase , for that matter ? ? Shrugs met that , from room clerks , from bellhops . Who measures ? ? But nothing , it appeared , long enough to attract attention . Cases , say , for musical instruments ? ? None noted at the Dumont . Several at the King Arthur . A combo was staying there . And had been for a week . Anything else ? ? Anything at all ? ? Shrugs met that . ( Detective Pearson , Eighteenth Precinct , thought for a time he might be on to something . A refuse bin at the Dumont turned up a florist's box -- a very long box for very long-stemmed flowers . Traces of oil on green tissue ? ? The lab to check . The lab : sorry . No oil . ) Anything at all strange ? ? Well , a man had tried , at the King Arthur , to register with an ocelot . At the Dumont , a guest had come in a collapsible wheel chair . At the King Arthur one guest had had his head heavily bandaged , and another had a bandaged foot and had walked with crutches . There had also been a man who must have had St. Vitus or something , because he kept jerking his head . As reports dribbled in , William Weigand tossed them into the centrifuge which had become his head . Mullins came in . There was no sign of Mrs. Lauren Payne at her house on Nod Road , Ridgefield , Connecticut . The house was modern , large , on five acres . Must have cost plenty . The State cops would check from time to time ; ; pass word when there was word to pass . Weigand tossed this news into the centrifuge . Sort things out , damn it . Sort out the next move . Try to forget motive for the moment . Consider opportunity . Only those actually with Payne when he was shot , or who had left the party within not more than five minutes ( make five arbitrary ) positively had none . The Norths ; ; Hathaway , Jerry's publicity director ; ; Livingston Birdwood , producer of Uprising . They had been with Payne when he was shot , could not therefore have shot him from above . Take Gardner Willings . He had left after the scuffle ; ; had been seen to leave . He would have had ample time to go into a blind somewhere and wait his prey . Consider him seriously , therefore ? ? Intangibles entered , then -- hunches which felt like facts . Willings would ambush , certainly ; ; Willings undoubtedly had . Willings was , presumably , a better than average shot . But -- hunch , now -- Willings would not ambush anything which went on two legs instead of four . Because , if for no other reason , Willings would never for a moment suppose he was not bigger , tougher , than anything else that went on two legs . Ambushes are laid by those who doubt themselves , as any man may against a tiger . Faith Constable had had to `` go on '' from the party and had , presumably , gone on . To be checked out further . Forget motive ? ? No , motive is a part of fact . Nobody in his right mind punishes a quarter-century-old dereliction . Grudges simply do not keep that well in a sane mind . Faith Constable had accomplished much in a quarter of a century . Jeopardize it now to correct so old a wrong ? ? Bill shook his head . Also , he thought , I doubt if she could hit the side of a barn with a shotgun . Lauren herself ? ? She had left the party early , pleading a headache . No lack of opportunity , presuming she had a gun . She might , conceivably , have brought one in in a large-enough suitcase . ( Check on the Payne luggage . ) She might now have taken it away again . Motive -- her husband wandering ? ? Bitter , unreasoning jealousy ? ? Heaven knew it happened and hell knew it too . But -- it happened , almost always , among the primitive and , usually , among the very young . ( Call it mentally young ; ; call it retarded . ) There was nothing to indicate that Lauren Payne was primitive . She did not move in primitive circles . She was young , but not that young . It occurred to Bill Weigand that he was , on a hunch basis , eliminating a good many . He reminded himself that all eliminations were tentative . He also reminded himself that he had an unusual number of possibilities . The Masons , mother or son , or mother and son ? ? Opportunity was obvious . Motive . Here , too , the cause to hate lay well back in the years . But bitterness had more cause to remain , even increasingly to corrode . With the boy , particularly . The boy had , apparently -- if Mrs. MacReady was right in what she had told Mullins -- only in recent months been forced to give up college , to work as a busboy . Seeing the man he blamed for this made much of -- youth and bitterness and -- Bill picked up the telephone ; ; got Mullins . `` Send out a pickup on Mrs. Mason and the boy when you've got enough to go on '' , Bill said . `` Right '' ? ? Mullins would do . A man named Lars Simon , playwright-director , had expressed a wish that Anthony Payne drop dead . He would say , of course , that he had not really had any such wish ; ; that what he had said was no more than one of those things one does say , lightly , meaning nothing . Which probably would turn out to be true ; ; which he obviously had to be given the opportunity to say . A man named Blaine Smythe , with `` y '' and `` e '' but pronounced without them , had been fired at Payne's insistence . He was also , if Pam North was right , a closer acquaintance of Lauren Payne's than she , now , was inclined to admit . He might deny the latter ; ; would certainly deny any connection between the two things , or any connection of either with murder . He would have to be given the opportunity . Mullins ? ? It was evident that Mullins was the man to go . It was evident that a captain should remain at his desk , directing with a firm hand and keeping a firm seat . Bill Weigand was good and tired of the wall opposite , and the crack in the plaster . Let Mullins keep the firm seat ; ; let Stein . When Siamese cats are intertwined it is difficult to tell where one leaves off and another begins . Stilts and Shadow , on Pam's bed , appeared to be one cat -- rather large , as Siamese cats go , and , to be sure , having two heads and two tails . On the other hand , they , or it , seemed to have no legs whatever . Pamela North said , `` Hi '' , to her cats , and added that proper cats met their humans at the door . Of four dark brown ears , one twitched slightly at this . `` All right '' , Pam said . `` I know it isn't dinnertime '' . But at this the one too-large cat suddenly became two cats , stretching . Shadow , the more talkative , began at once to talk , her voice piteous . Stilts , a more direct cat , leaped from the bed and trotted briskly toward the kitchen . Shadow looked surprised , wailed , and trotted after her . The hell it isn't dinnertime , two waving tails told Pam North . It was not , whatever tale was told by tails . Martha presumably would cope . She might be firm . It was most unlikely that she would be firm . They want to be fat cats , Pam thought , and lighted a cigarette and leaned back on a chaise and considered pulling her thoughts together . After a time , it occurred to her that her thoughts were not worth the trouble . A vague feeling that Anthony Payne had had it coming was hardly a thought and was , in any event , reprehensible . Had Faith Constable's explanation of her confidence , so uninvited , been a little thin ? ? That was more like a thought , but not a great deal more . Had that tall dark boy , carrying trays too heavy for him , found what he might have considered adulation of a man he probably hated more than he could bear ? ? And possessed himself -- how ? ? -- of a rifle and killed ? ? Pam found she had no answers ; ; had only a hope . The poor kid -- the poor , frail kid . Some people have luck and some have no luck and that , whatever people who prefer order say , is the size of it . The poor , unlucky -- The telephone rang . Pam realized , to her surprise , that she had been almost dozing . At four o'clock in the afternoon . Two martinis for lunch -- that was the trouble . I ought to remember . Don't pretend . You do remember . You just -- `` Hello ? ? Yes , this is she ? ? What '' ? ? The voice had music in it . Even with words coming too fast , they came on the music of the voice . `` I said I would '' , Pam said . `` They won't talk about who gave the information . Not unless they have to . They don't , Mrs. Constable . Not unless they have '' -- She was interrupted . `` Call this a cry for help '' , Faith Constable said . `` Through a door conveniently unlocked '' , Madden supplemented . `` That damn door '' , said the police chief . `` A gift horse to be viewed with suspicion '' . Madden's dark face wore a meditative look . `` If there was collusion between an outside murderer and a member of the household it would be an elementary precaution to check on the door later . And it makes a very poor red herring for an inside job . Much better to break a cellar window '' . `` Don't forget , there was the hope it would pass for a natural death '' , Pauling reminded him . `` Well , with a house as big as that there must be at least one cellar window that wouldn't be noticed right away unless there was a police investigation '' . `` Yeah . And a pane of glass isn't hard to '' -- The telephone interrupted him . He scooped up the receiver and said , `` Police chief '' , into the mouthpiece , and then , `` Oh yes , Mr. Benson . I was hoping I'd hear from you today '' . With his free hand he pulled a pad and pencil toward him and began to make notes as he listened , saying , `` Uh-huh '' and `` I see '' at intervals . At last he said , `` Well , thank you for calling , Mr. Benson . Although there was no doubt in my mind and we've been handling it as one I'm glad to have it made official '' . He hung up . `` Coroner '' , he said to Madden . `` He's just heard from the pathologist who says Mrs. Meeker apparently died from suffocation '' . Pauling looked at his notes . `` Many minute hemorrhages in the lungs ; ; particles of lint and thread in the mouth and nostrils . Scrapings from the bed linen identical with the lint and thread found in the nasal and oral cavities . No other cause of death apparent . Trachea clear of mucus and foreign objects . Brain examined for thrombosis , clot or hemorrhage . No signs of these , no gross hemorrhage of lungs , heart , brain or stomach '' . He paused . `` That's about it . Oh , the time of death . The duration of the digestive process varies , the pathologist says , but the empty stomach and the findings in the upper gastrointestinal tract indicate that Mrs. Meeker died several hours after her seven-o'clock dinner . Probably around midnight , give or take an hour either way '' . Pauling paused again . `` So there it is '' , he said . `` Not your problem , of course , unless Johnston and the murderer are one and the same '' . They discussed this possibility . However likely it was , Pauling said , he couldn't limit himself to it . He had to look for other prospects , other motives until more conclusive evidence pointing to Johnston came to light . Madden , with his investigation centered on the fraud , said that tomorrow he would go to the Bronx bank through which Mrs. Meeker's checks to Johnston had cleared . Arthur Williams had to be located , they agreed . He might have been in collusion with Johnston on the fraud ; ; he might be Mrs. Meeker's murderer or have played some part in her death . This was Madden's suggestion ; ; the police chief shook his head over it . If Arthur Williams was involved in the fraud or the murder , then he too had another identity . No one the Medfield police had questioned professed to know any more about him than about Johnston . Scholarship applicant ? ? Pauling looked doubtful . Madden explained that he was thinking of an application sent directly to Mrs. Meeker . Then he asked to use the phone and called Brian Thayer , who said that he was just leaving to keep a lunch date but would be home by two o'clock . Madden said that he would see him at two and made another call , this one to Mrs. Meeker's lawyers . Mr. Hohlbein was out for the day , but Mr. Garth would be free at one-thirty . The secretary's tone indicated that an appointment at such short notice was a concession for which Madden should be duly grateful . He inferred that Hohlbein and Garth were high-priced lawyers . He had lunch with Pauling . Promptly at one-thirty he entered Hohlbein and Garth's elegant suite of offices in Medfield's newest professional building . He disliked Garth on sight , conservative clothes and haircut , smile a shade too earnestly boyish for a man who must be well into his thirties , handclasp too consciously quick and firm . Youngish man on the make , Madden labeled him , and was ready to guess that in a correct , not too pushing fashion , the junior partner of the firm had political ambitions ; ; that Mrs. Garth would be impeccably suitable as the wife of a rising young lawyer ; ; that there were three children , two boys and a girl ; ; that she was active in the Woman's Club and he in Lions , Rotary , and Jaycee ; ; and finally , that neither of them had harbored an unorthodox opinion since their wedding day . Madden knew that he could be completely wrong about all this , but also knew that he would go right on disliking Garth . Garth was prepared to be helpful in what he referred to with fastidious distaste as this unfortunate Johnston affair , which would not , he said more than once , have ever come about if Mrs. Meeker had only seen fit to consult Mr. Hohlbein or him about it . Madden regretted not being able to find fault with so true a statement . He asked to see a copy of Mrs. Meeker's will . Garth brought one out . The date , October 8 , 1957 , immediately caught the inspector's eye . `` Fairly recent '' , he remarked . `` Was she in the habit of making new wills '' ? ? `` Oh no . She had reason to change the one she made right after Mr. Meeker's death . Her estate had grown considerably . She wanted to make a more equitable distribution of it among the groups that would benefit the most ; ; particularly the scholarship fund . At the time the will was drawn Mr. Hohlbein mentioned to me how mentally alert she seemed for her age , knowing just what changes she wanted made and so forth '' . Garth hesitated . `` Mr. Hohlbein and I have noticed some lapses since , though . Most of them this past year , I'd say . Even two or three years ago I doubt that she'd have become involved in this unfortunate Johnston affair . She'd have consulted us , you see . She always did before , and showed the utmost confidence in whatever we advised '' . The inspector nodded , doubting this . Mrs. Meeker hadn't struck him as ready to seek anyone's advice , least of all Garth's . With her sharp tongue she'd have cut his pompousness to ribbons . It would have been Hohlbein who handled her affairs . Madden settled back to read the will . He skimmed over the millions that went to Meeker Park , Medfield Hospital , the civic center , the Public Health Nursing Association , the library , and so on , pausing when he came to the scholarship fund . Two millions were added to what had been set aside for it in Mrs. Meeker's lifetime , and the proviso made that as long as Brian Thayer continued to discharge his duties as administrator of the fund to the satisfaction of the board of trustees ( hereinafter appointed by the bank administering the estate ) he was to be retained in his present capacity at a salary commensurate with the increased responsibilities enlargement of the fund would entail . A splendid vote of confidence in Thayer , Madden reflected . Tenure , too . Very nice for him . He went on to personal bequests , a list of names largely unknown to him . Twenty-five thousand to each of the great-nieces in Oregon ( not much to blood relatives out of millions ) ten thousand to this friend and that , five thousand to another ; ; to Brian Thayer , the sum of ten thousand dollars ; ; to the Pecks , ten thousand each ; ; to Joan Sheldon the conditional bequest of ten thousand to be paid to her in the event that she was still in Mrs. Meeker's employ at the time of the latter's death . ( No additional five thousand for each year after Joan's twenty-first birthday ; ; Mrs. Meeker hadn't got around to taking care of that . ) Too bad , Madden thought . Joan Sheldon had earned the larger bequest . Mr. Hohlbein was left twenty thousand , Garth ten . There were no other names Madden recognized . Arthur Williams's might well have been included , he felt . Mrs. Meeker had spent a small fortune on a search for him but had made no provision for him in her will if he should be found after her death , and had never mentioned his name to her lawyers . Madden took up this point with Garth , who shrugged it off . `` Old people have their idiosyncrasies '' . `` This one came a bit high at thirty thousand or more . `` Well , she had a number of them where money was concerned '' , Garth said . `` Sometimes we'd have trouble persuading her to make tax-exempt charitable contributions , and I've known her to quarrel with a plumber over a bill for fixing a faucet ; ; the next moment she'd put another half million into the scholarship fund or thirty thousand into something as impractical as this unfortunate Johnston affair . There was no telling how she'd react to spending money '' . Madden inquired next about the audit of the scholarship fund . There was an annual audit , Garth informed him . No discrepancies or shortages had ever been found . Brian Thayer was a thoroughly honest and competent administrator . His salary had reached the ten thousand mark . His expenses ran another four or five thousand . The lawyer didn't know him very well although he saw him occasionally at some dinner party -- Thayer , like himself , Madden reflected , was the extra man so prized by hostesses -- and found him easy enough to talk to . But he didn't play golf , didn't seem to belong to any local clubs -- his work took him away a lot , of course -- which probably accounted for his tendency to keep to himself . Garth's glance began to flicker to his watch . He said that he had already told the police chief that he didn't know what insurance man had recommended Johnston to Mrs. Meeker . He would offer no theory to account for her murder . The whole thing , his manner conveyed , was so far outside the normal routine of Hohlbein and Garth that it practically demanded being swept under the rug . No doubt Mrs. Meeker had snubbed him many a time and he felt no grief over her passing . Even so , Madden's dislike of the suave , correct lawyer deepened . It would be all right with him , he decided , if his investigation of the fraud , with its probable by-product of murder , led to Garth's door . Motive ? ? Ten-thousand-dollar bequest . At first glance , not much of a motive for a man of his standing ; ; but for all his air of affluence , who could tell what his private financial picture was ? ? The inspector knew as he left that this was wishful thinking . Nevertheless , he made a mental note to look into Garth's financial background . Brian Thayer had a downtown address . He lived in an apartment house not over three or four years old , a reclaimed island of landscaped brick and glass on the fringe of the business district . He occupied a two-bedroom apartment on the fourth floor , using the second bedroom as his office . Airy and bright , the apartment was furnished with good modern furniture , rugs , and draperies . Done by a professional decorator , Madden thought , and somehow as impersonal , as unremarkable as its occupant . In Dunston the rent would run close to two hundred a month ; ; in Medfield , perhaps twenty-five less , not all of it paid by Thayer , who could charge off one room on his expense account . He took Madden into the room he used as an office . It contained a desk , files , a typewriter on a stand , and two big leather armchairs . A newspaper open at stock-market reports lay on one of them . Thayer folded it up and offered a drink . The inspector declined . To begin the interview , he asked if Thayer , with more time to think it over , could add to what he had said the other day about Johnston . Thayer shook his head . `` It's all I think about , too . That and her death . It's still unbelievable that it was murder . For all her domineering ways , I can't conceive of her having had a deadly enemy '' . `` Dammit , Phil , are you trying to wreck my career ? ? Because that's what you're doing -- wrecking it , wrecking it , wrecking it '' ! ! Griffith had confronted Hoag on the building's front steps -- Hoag had been permitted no further -- and backed him against a wrought-iron railing . His rage had built up as he made his way here from the second floor , helped by the quantity of champagne he had consumed . Hoag said , `` I didn't send for you , Leigh . I want the captain in charge . Where is he '' ? ? `` Phil , for God's sake , go away . The undersecretary's in there . I told you there's nothing between Midge and me , nothing . It's all in your mind '' . A couple of sobs escaped him , followed by a sentiment that revealed his emotional state . `` Why , I'm not fit to touch the hem of her garment '' . `` Leigh , get a grip on yourself . It's not about you or Midge . I have some security information about the prime minister '' . Griffith looked at him suspiciously through red-rimmed eyes . `` Not about me ? ? You mean it , Phil ? ? You wouldn't pull my leg , old man ? ? I did get you on the platform this morning '' . `` I'm not pulling your leg . Will you call that captain '' ? ? `` No use , he won't come '' . He peered closely at Hoag in the gathering darkness . `` What happened to your head '' ? ? `` I was hit -- knocked out . Now will you get him '' ? ? `` He says I'm to take the message '' . He stared at Hoag drunkenly . `` Who'd hit you in the head '' ? ? `` It doesn't matter . You get back to the captain and tell him this : Somebody's going to take a shot at the prime minister , and Mahzeer is in on the plot . Tell him under no circumstances to trust the prime minister with Mahzeer '' . Griffith said , `` That's impossible . Mahzeer's the ambassador '' . `` Nevertheless it's true '' . `` Impossible '' . Griffith was trying to clear his head of the champagne fuzz that encased it . `` I'll show you how wrong you are . Mahzeer and the prime minister are alone right now '' . He nodded triumphantly . `` So that proves it '' ! ! Hoag looked terrified . `` Where are they '' ? ? `` Where'd you expect , the john ? ? Mahzeer's office '' . `` Where is that '' ? ? `` Facing us , two flights up . Look , old man , you can't go up . They won't even let you in the front door . So why don't you be a good boy and '' -- Hoag grabbed him by the shoulders . `` Listen to me , Leigh . If you want to spend another day in the State Department -- another day -- you get in there and tell that captain what I told you '' . He bit out the words . `` And you know I can do it '' . Griffith raised placating hands . `` Easy does it , Phil . I was just going . I'm on my way '' . He turned and fled into the house and made his way up the marble stairs without once looking back . On the second landing he paused to look for Docherty , didn't see him , and accepted a glass of champagne . He took several large swallows , recollected that Docherty had gone up another flight , and decided he would be wise to cover himself by finding him . The way Hoag was , no telling what he might say or do . He finished his champagne and climbed uncertainly to the next landing . At the top a uniformed officer blocked further progress . `` Yes , what is it '' ? ? He asked . `` I want Captain Docherty '' . He spotted Docherty coming out of a room at the far end of the corridor and called to him . Docherty said , `` It's okay , Bonfiglio , let him by '' . They walked toward each other . `` Well '' ? ? Griffith said , `` Hoag told me to tell you '' -- he waited until they were close ; ; it was hideously embarrassing -- `` not to let the prime minister be alone with Mahzeer '' . Griffith looked half-crocked to the captain ; ; it would be just like him . `` Why not '' ? ? `` He claims Mahzeer's in a plot to kill the P.M. '' . Docherty went taut : was it possible ? ? Could the ambassador himself be the man on this side the prime minister feared ? ? Not possible , he thought ; ; the prime minister knew who his enemy was here ; ; he wasn't going to allow himself to be led meekly to the slaughter . And if by some wild chance Mahzeer was the man , he wouldn't dare try anything now -- not after Docherty had looked in on the two of them to see that all was well . Docherty was damned if he would make a fool of himself again the way he had earlier over the laundry truck . One more muddleheaded play like that one and they'd be leading him away . Still , this had to be checked out . `` Where'd your friend Hoag get his information '' ? ? He asked . `` Haven't the faintest , Captain '' . `` Would you mind sending him up here ? ? I'd like to talk to him '' . Troubled , he continued along the corridor , poking his head into the next office for a careful look around . But Hoag had not stayed on the front steps when Griffith disappeared into the building . He was unwilling to rely on Griffith's carrying his message , and he had no confidence the police would act on it . If Mahzeer was alone with the prime minister he could be arranging his execution while Hoag stood out here shivering in the darkening street . He would have to do something on his own . But what ? ? The door opened and three men and a woman in a sari swept past him and down the stairs . In the lighted interior he saw other men and women struggling into their wraps . These were the early departures ; ; in half an hour the reception would be over . If Mahzeer was planning to set up the prime minister for Muller he would have to do it in the next few minutes . Hoag descended the stone steps to the street and looked up at the building . Wide windows with many small leaded panes swept across the upper stories . On the second floor he saw the animated faces of the party guests ; ; the scene looked like a Christmas card . On the third floor one of the two windows was lighted ; ; it was framed in maroon drapes , and no faces were visible . This would be Mahzeer's office . He and the prime minister would be back from the window , seated at Mahzeer's desk ; ; they would be going over papers Mahzeer had saved as excuse for just such a meeting . In a minute , or five minutes , the business would be done ; ; Mahzeer would stand up , the prime minister would follow . Mahzeer would direct the prime minister's attention to something out the window and would guide him forward and then step to one side . The single shot would come ; ; Hoag would carry its sound to his grave . Mahzeer , of course , would be desolate . How was he to suspect that an assassin had been lurking somewhere across the street waiting for just such a chance ? ? Hoag turned . Where across the street ? ? Where was Muller waiting with the rifle ? ? Narrow four-story buildings ran the length of the block like books tightly packed on a shelf . Most of them could be eliminated ; ; Muller's would have to be one of the half dozen almost directly opposite . The legation was generously set back from the building line ; ; if the angle of fire were too great the jutting buildings on either side would interfere . Would the shot come from a roof ? ? He ran his eye along the roof copings ; ; almost at once a figure bulked up . But dully glinting on the dark form were the buttons and badge of a policeman . With a cop patrolling the road Muller would have to be inside a building -- if he was here at all , and not waiting for the prime minister somewhere between this street and the terminal building at La Guardia Airport . Hoag crossed the narrow street , squeezing between parked cars to reach the sidewalk . From this side he could see farther into the legation's third-story window , but he saw no faces ; ; the room's occupants were still seated or they had been called into the hallway by an alarmed police captain . If only the latter were true . He walked rapidly along the buildings scanning their facades : one was a club -- that was out ; ; two others he ruled out because all their windows were lighted . That left three , possibly four , one looking much like the next . He climbed the steps of the first and opened the door to the vestibule . He quickly closed it again . He had assumed that all these buildings had been divided into apartments , but this one , from a glance at the hall furnishings , was obviously still a functioning town house , and its owners were in residence ; ; that made it doubtful as the hiding place of a man whose plans had to be made in advance . He went on to the next building and found what he expected -- the mingled cooking aromas of a public vestibule . On one wall was the brass front of a row of mailboxes ; ; there were six apartments . Now what ? ? The names on the mailboxes meant nothing to him . This was senseless -- he had no idea what to look for . He peered in the boxes themselves ; ; all were empty except one , and that one was jammed with letters and magazines . The occupants of Apartment Number 3 were probably away for a few days , and not likely to return on a Friday . Had Muller made the same deduction ? ? Muller was attracted to the lore of mailboxes . He opened the inner door ; ; the cooking odors were stronger -- all over the city , at this hour , housewives would be fussing over stoves . He climbed , as quickly as he could urge his body , up the two unbroken flights to the third floor , pulling himself along on a delicate balustrade , all that remained of the building's beauty . He paused on the landing to steady his breathing and then bent to examine the single door by the light of the weak bulb overhead . Now he was certain : the lock had not yielded to Muller's collection of keys ; ; fresh scars showed that the door had been prized open . It had been shut again , but the lock was broken ; ; he noted with a thrill of fear that the door moved under his touch . What was he to do now ? ? He had thought no further than finding Muller . He realized now he had more than half hoped he wouldn't find him -- that Muller would not be here , that the attempt would be scheduled for somewhere beyond Hoag's control . He could not break in on an armed man . He would have to climb back down to the street and signal a cop . Was there time ? ? His thoughts were scattered by the sharp report of a rifle from the other side of the door . Hoag pushed open the door : at the far end of the long dark room Muller was faintly silhouetted against the window , the rifle still raised ; ; he stood with his feet apart on a kitchen table he had dragged to the sill . He turned his head to the source of the disturbance and instantly back to the window and his rifle sight , dismissing Hoag for the moment with the same contempt he had shown in their encounter at Hoag's apartment . Hoag stretched his left hand to the wall and fumbled for the switch : evil flourishes in the dark . The room was bathed in light at the instant Muller's second shot came . Muller , nakedly exposed at the bright window like a deer pinned in a car's headlights , threw down the rifle and turned to jump from the table ; ; his face wore a look of outrage . A shot caught him and straightened him up in screaming pain ; ; a following volley of shots shattered glass , ripped the ceiling , and sent him lurching heavily from the table . He was dead before his body made contact with the floor . Hoag stumbled back into the hall , leaned against the wall , and started to retch . After Captain Docherty sent Arleigh Griffith for Hoag he was able to complete his detailed inspection of the third floor and to receive a report from his man covering the floors above before Griffith returned , buoyed up by a brief stop for another glass of champagne . The safe at Ingleside District Station stands next to the gum machine in a narrow passageway that leads to Captain Harris's office ( to the left ) , the lieutenant's office ( farther along and to the left ) and the janitor's supply closet ( straight ahead ) . The safe is a repository for three dead flashlight batteries , a hundred and fifty unused left-hand fingerprint cards , a stack of unsold Policemen's Ball tickets from last year , and thirty-seven cents in coins and stamps . Gun set the captain's fifth of Hiram Walker inside the safe before he reported to Lt. Killpath , though he knew that Killpath's ulcer prevented him from making any untoward incursion on Herman Wolff's gift . It was more a matter of tact , and also it was none of Killpath's goddam business . He walked up to the lieutenant's office , leaned wearily against the gun rack that housed four rifles and a gas gun nobody remembered having used and a submachine gun that was occasionally tried out on the Academy Range . He stared at the clerk who sat at a scarred and ancient fumed-oak desk stuffing envelopes . `` Where's the Lieut '' ? ? The clerk wagged his head toward the captain's office . Gun went to the connecting door , which was open , and stood at attention while Orville Torrence Killpath , in full uniform , finished combing his hair . The lieutenant's sparse brown hair was heavily pomaded , and as Killpath raked the comb through it , it stuck together in thatches so that it looked like umbrella ribs clinging to his pink skull . The lieutenant eyed Gun's reflection in the mirror over the washbowl and then glanced back at his own face , moving the comb methodically around his head . Leave me alone , Gun thought . Fight with Sam Schaeffer , fight with the whole damned Bureau . But leave me alone . Because I'm looking for the son of a bitch that killed that old man , and I'm going to get him . If you just leave me to hell alone , Lieutenant . Killpath peered through half-closed lids at his reflection , thrust up his chin in a gesture of satisfaction and about-faced . Gun waited for Killpath to sit down behind the desk near the window . He sat stiff-backed in a chair that did not swivel , though it was obvious to Gun that Killpath felt his position as acting captain plainly merited a swivel chair . The desk before him was in no better repair than the rest of the furniture crowded into the room , including wooden file cabinets with some of their pulls yanked off and a wardrobe stained with the roof seepage of countless seasons . Killpath pulled one thin leg up , clamping his arms around the shinbone to press his knee into an incredibly scrawny gut . It was the posture which the men had come to recognize as that of Killpath defying his ulcer . He put his chin on his kneecap , stretching his neck like that of a turkey on a chopping block , and stared wordlessly at his sergeant . Gun waited . The 7:45 bell rang and he could hear the outside doors bang shut , closing in the assembled day watch . Finally , Orville intoned through his hawk nose , `` We can't have people running in any time they please , Sergeant '' . `` No , sir '' . `` Running in , running out . Can't have it . Makes for confusion and congestion '' . He rocked back in the chair , knee locked against stomach , his beady eyes fixed on Matson . He was silent again , possibly listening to the sounds in the squadroom . Roll was being called . Gun cleared his throat . Killpath said , `` You were expected to report to my office twenty minutes ago , Sergeant . That's not getting all the juice out of the orange , now is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . Then Killpath smiled . Gun knew that nothing but aces back to back would give the lieutenant an ulcer and a smile at the same time . The day-watch platoon commander , Lt. Rinker , was calling out the beat assignments , but Matson couldn't make the names mean anything . `` I called the station at three this morning '' , Killpath's nasal voice pronounced . `` Do you have any idea who might have been in charge at the time '' ? ? `` Sergeant Vaughn , sir '' . `` Now , now , you're just guessing , Sergeant '' . He smiled thinly , savoring his joke . `` What if I said nobody was here but a couple of patrolmen '' ? ? `` Sir , Vaughn knows better than to leave the station without a relief . He must have '' -- `` He let a patrolman take over the duties of the station keeper . Now that's not regulation , is it '' ? ? `` No , sir '' . `` But you didn't know a thing about it , did you '' ? ? Killpath leaned forward ; ; his foot slipped off the chair and he put it back again , frowning now . `` That's not taking one's command with a responsible attitude , Matson '' . Gun told himself that the old bastard was a fool . But stupidity was no consolation when it had rank . `` I was out in the district , sir '' . `` Oh , yes . So I have heard '' . He stretched a pale hand out to the scattered papers on his desk . `` I might point out that your inability to report to my office this morning when you were instructed to do so has not ah limited my knowledge of your activities as you may have hoped '' . He took up a white sheet of paper , dark with single-spaced data . A car pulled into the driveway outside the window . Gun knew it was Car 12 , the wagon , returned from delivering Ingleside's drunk-and-disorderlies to the City Jail . But for some fool reason he couldn't remember which men he'd put on the transfer detail . He stared at the report in Killpath's hand , sure it was written by Accacia -- just as sure as if he'd submitted it in his scrawled longhand . He sucked in his breath and kept quiet while Killpath laid down the sheet again , wound the gold-wire stems of his glasses around his ears and then , eying the report as it lay before him on the desk , intoned , `` Acting Lieutenant Gunnar Matson one failed to see that the station keeper was properly relieved two absented himself throughout the entire watch without checking on the station's activities or the whereabouts of his section sergeants three permitted members of the Homicide Detail of the Inspector's Bureau to arrogate for their own convenience a patrolman who was thereby prevented from carrying on his proper assignment four failed to notify the station commander Acting Captain O. T. Killpath of a homicide occurring in the district five frequented extralegal establishments known as after-hours spots for purposes of an unofficial and purportedly social nature and six '' -- he leaned back and peeled off his glasses `` -- failed to co-operate with the Acting Captain by returning promptly when so ordered . What have you to say to that , Sergeant '' ? ? Killpath sailed the paper across the desk , but Matson didn't pick it up or even glance at it . `` Well '' ? ? `` I didn't think Accacia knew so many big words , Lieutenant '' . Killpath licked his lips . `` Patrolman Accacia is an alert and conscientious law-enforcement officer . I don't think his diligence mitigates your negligence , Matson '' . `` Negligence , hell '' ! ! Gun held his breath a moment , pushing the volume and pitch of his voice down under the trapdoor in his throat . `` Sir . I would have been negligent and a goddam lousy cop to boot , if I'd sat around this station all night when somebody got away with murder in my district . It's too bad I didn't call you , and it's too bad I let Schaeffer use Accacia when he could have had a boy who'd be glad to learn something of Homicide procedure . But I'm not one damned bit sorry I went out to question the people I know in the places they hang around , and '' -- `` Let's not push our patience beyond the danger line , Sergeant '' , Killpath nasaled . `` I shouldn't like to have to write you up for insubordination as well as dereliction of duty '' . Gun stiffened , his hands balling into fists at his sides . He clamped his jaws to keep the fury from spilling out . An argument with Orville Torrence Killpath was as frustrating and as futile as a cap pistol on a firing range . Killpath leaned forward again , rocked comfortably with his arms still wrapped around one knee . `` Let's just remember , Sergeant , that we must all carry our own umbrella . A district station can't run smoothly , unless '' -- He interrupted himself , looking around Gun at the doorway . `` Morning , Lieutenant Rinker '' . `` Sorry , Orville . I thought you hadn't come in yet '' . `` I've been here for some time '' . He stood up , cocked his head and eyed Gun coldly . `` The sergeant is just leaving '' . It had come as no great surprise to Matson that the hot water in the showers didn't work , that Loren Severe had thrown up all over the stairs , or that some thieving bastard of a cop had walked off with his cigarettes . It was the best he could hope for on a watch that had ended with a session in Killpath's office . Now , as he passed the open counter that divided the assembly room from the business office , he nodded and said good night to the station keeper and his clerks , not stopping to hear the day-watch playback of his chewing out . Not that he gave a damn what the grapevine sent out about Killpath's little speech on the comportment of platoon commanders . He just didn't want to talk about it . If the acting captain wanted his acting lieutenant to sit on his ass around the station all night , Killpath would just have to go out and drag Gun back by the heels once an hour ; ; because he'd be damned if he was going to be a mid-watch pencil-pusher just to please his ulcerated pro-tem captain . At the doorway he squinted up at the gray morning overcast and patted his jacket pockets for the cigarettes , remembering then that he'd left them at the Doughnuttery . He could pick up another pack on his way home , if he were going home . But even before he started across the oiled road to his Plymouth , parked in the lot under the cypress trees across from the station , he knew that he wasn't going home . Not yet . It was nine o'clock in the morning : the hour which , like a spade turning clods of earth , exposed to the day a myriad of busy creatures that had lain dormant in the quiet night . Mission Street at this hour was populated by a whole community that Gun could not have seen on his tour of duty -- the neighborhood that had known Urbano Quintana by day . Then Sol Phillips had purchased the Alliance Furniture Mart seventeen years ago . It was professedly worth three thousand dollars in stock and good will , and the name was written in gold in foot-high letters across each of the two display windows . On the right window , at eye level , in smaller print but also in gold , was Gonzalez , Prop. , and under that , Se Habla Espanol . Mr. Phillips took a razor to Gonzalez , Prop. , but left the promise that Spanish would be understood because he thought it meant that Spanish clientele would be welcome . Language was no problem anyway ; ; Mr. Phillips had only to signal from his doorway to summon aid from the ubiquitous bilingual children who played on the sidewalks of Mission Street . Aside from the fact that business was slow this time of year and his one salesgirl was not the most enterprising , Mr. Phillips had no worries at all , and he said as much to Gun Matson , who sat across from him in civilian clothes , on a Jiffy-Couch-a-Bed , mauve velour , $79.89 nothing-down special ! ! `` She's honest as the day '' , Mr. Phillips said , and added , `` Mr. Gunnar , I can say this to you : Beebe is a little too honest . You can't tell a customer how much it's going to cost him to refinance his payments before he even signs for a loan on the money down ! ! A time plan is a mere convenience , you understand , and when '' -- He interrupted himself , smiling . `` I put her in lamps . That way I don't lose so much '' . `` Why don't you just hire somebody else '' ? ? `` She says she has to finish a story '' . He shrugged . `` I asked her why she couldn't do it tomorrow , but it seems the muse is working good tonight and she's afraid to let it go '' . Casey made some comment , but his mind was busy as he considered the man . His name was George Needham and he , too , had come from a good family . He was perhaps thirty-two , nicely set up , with light brown hair that had a pronounced wave . He was always well groomed and well tailored , and he had that rich man's look which was authentic enough and came from two good prep schools and a proper university . An only child , he had done all the things that young men do who have been born to money and social position until his father double-crossed him by dying broke . Since then he had worked at this and that , though some said his main interest was gambling . All this went through Casey's mind in the first instant , but what held his interest was the fact that these two should be together at all . For he had understood that Betty had been engaged to a boy named Barry Jenkins . She had grown up with young Jenkins , and he had heard that they had been at the point of getting married at least twice . He wanted to ask her about Jenkins now , but he knew he couldn't do so in Needham's presence . And so , still wondering and a little perplexed , he grinned at the girl and spoke lightly to make sure that she would know he was kidding . `` Where did you pick him up '' ? ? `` Oh , I've known him quite a while '' . She glanced at her companion fondly . `` Haven't I , George '' ? ? `` I've been after her for years '' , Needham said , `` but I've never been able to get anywhere until the last few days '' . The girl's eyes were softly shining as she reached out and touched Casey's hand . `` Can I tell you a secret ? ? We're going to get married . Do you approve '' ? ? Casey kept his smile fixed , but some small inner disturbance was working on him as he thought again about Needham , who was eight or ten years older than the girl . He wondered whether Needham was going to swear off gambling and get a steady job or whether he was counting on the income from Betty's estate to subsidize him . None of this showed in his face , and he tried to keep his skepticism in hand . He made a point of frowning , of acting out the part of the fond father-confessor . `` I'll have to give it some thought '' , he said . `` You wouldn't want me to say yes without making sure his intentions are honorable , would you '' ? ? She made a face at him and then she laughed . `` Of course not '' . `` I'll get my references in order '' , Needham said , and though he spoke with a smile , Casey somehow got the idea that he was not particularly amused . `` Stop by any time , Casey '' . He stood up and touched the girl's arm . `` Come on , darling . If you're really serious about working on that story , I'd better take you home '' . Casey watched them go , still frowning absently and then dismissing the matter as he called for his check . As he went out he told Freddie the dinner was perfect , and when he got his hat and coat from Nancy Parks and put a fifty-cent piece in the slot , he told her to be sure that it went toward her dowry . A taxi took him back to the bar and grill where he had left his car , and a few minutes later he found a parking place across the street from his apartment . Because his mind had been otherwise occupied for the past couple of hours , he did not think to look and see if Jerry Burton's car was still there . In fact , he did not think about Jerry Burton at all until he entered his living room and closed the door behind him . Only then , when his glance focused on the divan and saw that it was empty , did he remember his earlier problem . Even from where he stood he could see the neatly folded blanket that he had spread over Burton , the pillow , the sheet of paper on top of it . Then he was striding across the room , his thoughts confused but the worry building swiftly inside him as he snatched up the note . Jack : Look in the wastebasket . I knew the only way I could beat you was to play possum , but it was a good try , kid , and I appreciate it . The wastebasket stood near the wall next to the divan , and the instant Casey picked it up he knew what had happened . The discarded papers inside were sodden , there was a glint of liquid at the bottom , and the smell of whisky was strong and distinct . He put the basket down distastefully , muttering softly and thoroughly disgusted with himself and his plan that had seemed so foolproof . For he remembered too well how he had brought back the loaded drinks to Burton and then returned to the kitchen to get weaker drinks for himself . For another second or two he gave in to the annoyance that was directed at himself ; ; then his mind moved on to be confronted by something far more serious , and as the thought expanded , the implications jarred him . It no longer mattered that Burton had outsmarted him . The important thing was that Burton had gone somewhere to meet a blackmailer with a gun in his pocket . And that gun was empty . Even before his mind had rounded out the idea , he thrust one hand into his trousers pocket and pulled out the six slugs he had taken from the revolver . He considered them with brooding eyes , brows bunched as his brain grappled with the problem and tried to find some solution . He said : `` The crazy fool '' , half aloud . He put the shells on the table , as though he could no longer bear to hold them . He thought : Where the hell could he have gone ? ? How can I find him ? ? There was no answer to this and he began to pace back and forth across the room , his imagination out of control . He tried to tell himself that maybe Burton had sobered up enough to get some sense . Maybe he only intended to scare the blackmailer , whoever he was , in which case an unloaded gun would be good enough . He thought of other possibilities , none of them satisfactory , and finally he began to think , to wonder if there was some way he could reach Burton . Then , as he turned toward the telephone , it rang shrilly to shatter the stillness in the room and he reached for it eagerly . `` Yeah '' , he said . `` Casey '' ? ? `` Yeah '' . `` Tony Calenda '' . Casey heard the voice distinctly and he knew who it was , but it took him a while to make the mental readjustment and control the disturbance inside his head . When he heard Calenda say : `` What about that picture you took this afternoon '' ? ? It still took him another few seconds to remember the job he had done for Frank Ackerly . `` What picture '' ? ? He demanded . `` You took a picture of me at the corner of Washington and Blake about three thirty this afternoon '' . `` Who says so '' ? ? `` One of my boys '' . Casey believed that much . Calenda was not the sort who walked around without one of his `` boys '' close at hand . `` So '' ? ? `` With my trial coming up in Federal Court next week I wouldn't want that picture published '' . `` Who says it's going to be published '' ? ? `` I wouldn't even want it to get around '' . Under normal circumstances Casey was a little fussy when people told him what to do with pictures he had taken . Even so , he generally listened and was usually reasonable to those who voiced their objections properly . Right now , however , he was still too worried about Jerry Burton , and the gun that had no bullets , and the story Burton had told him , to care too much about Tony Calenda . His nerves were getting a little ragged and his impatience put an edge in his voice . `` Look '' , he said . `` I was hired to take a picture . I took it . That's all I know about it and that's all I care '' . `` Maybe you'd better tell the guy who hired you what I said '' . `` You tell him '' . `` All right '' , Calenda said , his voice still quiet . `` But I meant what I said , Casey . If that picture gets around and I find out you had anything to do with it , I'm going to send a couple of my boys around to see you '' . `` You do that '' , Casey said . `` Just be sure to send your two best boys , Tony '' . He hung up with a bang , annoyed at himself for running off at the mouth like that but still terribly concerned with the situation he had helped to create . As soon as he could think logically again he reached for the telephone directory and found Jerry Burton's home number . He dialed it and listened to it ring ten times before he hung up . He called the bar and grill where he had picked Burton up that afternoon . When he was told that no one had seen Burton since then , he thought of three other places that were possibilities . Each time he got the same answer and in the end he gave up . By the time he had smoked three cigarettes he had calmed down . He had done all he could and that was that . And anyway Burton was not the kind of guy who would be likely to get in trouble even when he was drunk . He , Casey , had been scared for a while , but that had come mostly from the fact that he felt responsible . He should have stayed here and watched Burton . He didn't . So he made a mistake . So what ? ? He kept telling himself this as he went out to the kitchen to make a drink . Only then did he decide he didn't want one . He considered opening a can of beer but vetoed that idea too . Finally he went into the bedroom and sat down to take off his shoes . He had just finished unlacing the right one when the telephone rang again . When he snatched it up the voice that came to him was quick and urgent . `` Casey ? ? You don't know me but I know you . If you want a picture get to the corner of Adams and Clark just as fast as you can . If you hurry you might beat the headquarters boys '' . Casey heard the click of the distant receiver before he could open his mouth , and it took him no more than three seconds to make his decision . For over the years he had received many such calls . Some of them came from people who identified themselves . Some telephoned because he had done them a favor in the past . Others because they expected some sort of reward for the information . A few passed along a tip for the simple reason that they liked him and wanted to give him a break . Only an occasional tip turned out to be a phony , and , like the police , Casey had made a point of running down all such suggestions and he did not hesitate this time . He was in his car with his camera and equipment bag in less than two minutes , and it took him only three more to reach the corner , a block from Columbus Avenue . It was a district of small factories and loft buildings and occasional tenements , and he could see the police radio car as he rounded the corner and slammed on the brakes . He did not bother with his radio -- there would be time for that later -- but as he scrambled out on the pavement he saw the filling station and the public telephone booth and knew instantly how he had been summoned . The police car had pulled up behind a small sedan , its headlights still on . Slowly he pulled out the hand throttle until the boat was moving at little more than a crawl , and watched Elaine rapidly spin from one station to another , tune in the null , then draw in a line on the chart . `` We're out just a little too far . Make a 90 degree straight for shore '' . Poet came in , raising his eyebrows appreciatively as he saw Elaine . `` Now '' ? ? He asked . `` Pretty quick '' , she replied . `` Will you drop the anchor '' ? ? Poet nodded , swung below and a moment later emerged from the forward hatch where he picked up the anchor . The rock and roll music coming from the radio station suddenly faded as the boat coasted into the null on the Aj . `` Reverse '' , Elaine said , then peered through the loop of the RDF and waved to Poet . A second later she came behind the wheel and backed off the anchor line until it was set in the ocean floor . She cut the engines and slowly the cruiser swung around on the end of its lines until its bow was pointing into the wind and the cockpit faced toward the shore . Nick watched her somewhat enviously as she efficiently cut the engines , and started the auxiliary motor . Poet came up from below , wearing new bathing trunks . The price tag hung from the belt and he pulled it off as he entered the chartroom and looked at it curiously . Nick wondered if Elaine had bought them , but he said nothing . Nobody , he suddenly realized , was saying anything . It seemed as if they were all under a spell . There should be an excited conversation , for somewhere , directly below them , was a treasure lost for more than four hundred years . But instead of chatter there was a null , like on the radio direction finder . Once , in New York , he had gone flying with some friends in a small private airplane with a single engine . They had all been laughing , joking , when suddenly the engine had failed . No one had screamed . No one had prayed . All had fallen into a complete silence , listening to the wind whistle over the wings . The pilot had been good . He'd landed the plane on a small airstrip in Connecticut and as soon as the aircraft had coasted to a stop , everyone had burst into chatter at the same moment . There had been tension in the plane during the silent descent ; ; a tension similar to the one now . But in the plane there was a concrete reason for it . Now , at this moment , there should be none unless skin diving was much more dangerous than he had been led to believe . Yet tension existed . The same taut-nerved relationship as there had been between the passengers on the plane now strained at the three of them here on the boat . It hung over them like a cloud , its arrival as sudden as a cloud skidding over the sun . Silently , Elaine picked up her keys from the table and went out into the cockpit , Poet behind her , Nick trailing behind him . She threw back a cushion over one of the seats , unlocked a padlock on the chest beneath it , then presently straightened , holding a long knife and a wicked looking spear gun in her hand . Poet whistled softly as he looked at the gun . `` Hydraulic '' ? ? He asked . Elaine nodded . `` They are the best '' . She kicked the locker lid shut and replaced the cushion . `` They are the most efficient '' . `` And the deadliest '' , Poet commented as he buckled on his tank harness . `` Why do you need an arsenal '' ? ? Nick asked , apprehensively , staring at the weapon . `` It's quite possible there's more than codfish down there , man '' , Poet replied with a short , nervous laugh as he held the harness for Elaine . A moment later , moving awkwardly because of the swimming fins , she picked up the gun , handed the knife to Poet , then rolled off the transom of the boat , back first . Poet nodded to Nick and entered the water in a similar fashion . Another moment and they were out of sight , leaving behind only a string of bubbles as a clue to their whereabouts . For a while Nick followed the twisting course of the bubbles , wondering which set came from Elaine . They remained close together , their air trail wiggling like serpents traveling side by side . Eventually the bubbles became lost in the sparkle of the ocean surface , and he rolled over on his back . Clasping his hands behind his head , he stared at the blue sky . There was nothing quite like being alone on a boat on the ocean . Alfredo certainly must have enjoyed being alone . Next to the ocean , probably the loneliest spot was the desert . If Elaine's uncle had stuck to this desire for aloneness , he probably would still be alive . Yet Alfredo wanted money wanted money to roam through the deserts . And Graham wanted money probably to roam among the dice tables in Las Vegas . It was an odd combination a strange pair to stumble upon the wreck of the Trinidad . But Graham hadn't stumbled on it . Two to three weeks prior to the charter of the Virginia , Graham had been snooping around the San Luis Rey Mission . The small helicopter with its two steel skids churned offshore and Nick raised up to watch it heading south . That was a hell of a note , he thought . A couple couldn't even find a secluded spot anywhere on a beach to neck nowadays without someone swooping down upon them . If the character flying that thing had gone over San Clemente Island yesterday he would have had an eyeful . Off to the west a beautiful schooner slowly beat its way into the wind , headed on a tack toward San Clemente . Behind it a cabin cruiser drifted crossways in the small ground-swell , a lone fisherman in the chair aft . The fisherman was right in the middle of the Deep . Nick recalled stories that the two best fishing spots in Southern California were over the La Jolla Deep and the Redondo Deep , two spots where the ocean dropped off to fantastic depths almost from the shoreline . Someday , geologists had warned , the land on both sides of these deeps would fall into the ocean and no more La Jolla or Redondo Beach . Meanwhile , fishermen took advantage of them to pull up whoppers . Sometimes the fish exploded as they neared the surface because of the difference in pressure . Why , he wondered , had Elaine wanted him along on this trip ? ? He couldn't skindive , he couldn't run a boat , except on the open sea . He stood up , stretched , looked around for the bubbles , but could see none . Strolling down to the galley , he lit the butane under the coffee pot and when the brew was heated , poured himself a cup and went up to the chartroom . Turning on the hi-fi , he went back to the cockpit , stretched out on the cushions and listened to the music . Elaine and Poet returned together , popping up over the transom almost like dolphins breaking water . He sat up and watched as they pulled themselves over the stern . `` Any luck '' ? ? He asked . Poet shook his head , sliding his face mask up on his forehead . `` We're right on the edge of the Deep '' , Elaine said . Pulling off her face mask , she carefully placed the spear gun across the stern , then lifted her wet hair from her back and squeezed out the water . `` Which is a break as the area to search is less than a square mile '' , she added as she swung her legs over the transom . `` Any news '' ? ? `` Not a thing '' . He tossed her a towel , then repeated the service for Poet . `` Cigarette '' ? ? Elaine shook her head as she slipped out of her harness , but Poet nodded . His feet still hung over the stern of the transom , but as he reached for the smoke he raised them to swing them in . The fin on his foot caught on the moulding , throwing him off balance . His forearm smashed painfully into the narrow washboard and he grimaced as he grabbed his bruised limb with his other hand and rolled into the boat . `` Kee-reist '' ! ! The word hissed distinctly from Poet's lips as he struggled to his feet . Nick's body became rigid . Turning slowly he saw Poet in a brilliant glare of horror . Poet ! ! His face was still creased in pain as he studied the underside of his arm . Poet a murderer ? ? Turning quickly toward Elaine , Nick saw that she , too , stood in shocked surprise . The sudden silence was too silent . Instinctively aware of the charged atmosphere , Poet raised his head slowly , looking first at Elaine . She had caught the implication of the oath . Her face was frozen into the mask of a mannequin , her body absolutely motionless . And then Nick knew that all of them knew Elaine , himself and Poet . Elaine recovered first , so quickly that Nick thought he might have imagined her sudden reaction . `` Do you need a bandage '' ? ? She asked steadily . Poet rubbed his arm . `` It's like banging a shin '' , he said , his eyes lingered on Nick's face , then moved back to Elaine . `` Hurts like hell for a second , then it disappears '' . `` I'll get some ointment '' . Elaine turned and started toward the companionway . But her walk was too steady , too slow , telegraphing her fear . Nick sensed it . So did Poet . Springing like a cat , he leaped back , swooped up the spring gun and , whirling , pointed it toward the cabin . At the same instant , Nick hit the barrel and threw himself upon the smaller man . The gun fired next to his ear with a vicious whoosh like the first stroke of an old steam engine . At the same instant , Elaine screamed wildly , the sound ending abruptly as Nick went off the boat and into the water on top of the frantic , struggling Poet . The moment the sea closed over Nick , some atavistic sense warned him that he would survive in this alien element only if he did not panic . But the murderer to whom he clung had a tremendous advantage . The wide flippers on Poet's feet gave his legs incredible power , driving the two of them down into the water as they rolled over and over . Poet was the captured , arms pinioned to his side , and he twisted convulsively trying to escape . Poet would escape , Nick thought grimly , because he wore the apparatus which would keep him alive under water . But Nick would not let go . The rubber and glass face mask slipped from Poet's forehead , bounced painlessly off Nick's chin , then disappeared . Poet twisted again and Nick's knuckles scraped on the air tank , ripping off the skin . For a split second , Nick relaxed his grip and Poet's slippery body spun completely around before Nick could stop him , holding him now from the rear . Something flailed at the side of Nick's head as they rolled around and around . Suddenly Poet stopped struggling and the two of them hung suspended in the water , not rising , not sinking . A sharp pain lanced across Nick's chest and a bubble of air escaped from his tortured lungs , joining dozens of others that sailed lazily toward the surface like helium balloons rising into the sky . A black , snake-like object swayed eerily in front of him , spewing bubbles from its flat cobra head . The air hose was free ! ! The discovery struck Nick like a blow . Desperately , Nick flashed one hand up , catching Poet's neck in the bend of his elbow . At the same instant , he grabbed the loose , writhing hose with his other hand and bit down on the hard rubber mouthpiece . Instinctively he exhaled through his nose then sucked in the air from the hose . At once the excruciating pain in his chest stopped and he was seized with a sudden , wild exultation . As if this was a signal , Poet abruptly began to thrash the water and the quick movement slowly made them sink through the water . Relentlessly , Nick held on , sucking on the hose , inhaling the air that belonged to Poet . Poet was not fighting Nick now . Harbor Point sticks out into the ocean like the fat neck of a steamer clam . It's a rich village but not much for action -- too many solid residents , not enough tourists or working stiffs . It's at the far end of the county and the last time I came here was for a hit and run manslaughter -- about seven months ago . Chief Bob Moore looked his same hick-self ; ; a man mountain running to lard in his middle-age . Seeing me he said with real surprise , `` Well , well , ain't we honored ! ! Hardly expected the head of County Homicide up for this murder . You sure climbed fast , Jed . Rookie investigator last summer and now it's Inspector Jed . Took me 19 years to become Chief of our three man police force . Proves a college education pays off '' . His sarcasm was followed by a stupid grin of his thick mouth and bad teeth . `` I guess it helps '' , I said , paying no attention to his ribbing . `` Never could figure out why you ever wanted to be a cop , Jed . You're not only young but well , you don't even look like a police officer . A runt with narrow shoulders and that brush haircut hell , you'd pass for a juvenile delinquent of the hotrod set . In my day the first requirement for a cop was to look like the law , big and tough . Man , when my 275 pounds and six-four comes along , why it's the same as another badge . When I say move , a guy moves '' ! ! `` Don't worry about my being tough , Moore . Also , it's far too early in the day for corny lines like the bigger they come You've had your gassy lecture , let's get to work . Who was the murdered woman Mrs. Buck '' ? ? `` Widow , nice sort of woman . Comfortably fixed . Ran a fair-sized farm . Came to the Harbor as a bride and Don't worry Jed , this one is in the bag . I know the killer , have the only road off the peninsula covered '' . `` Yeah , passed your road block as I drove in '' , I said , sitting on his polished desk . Although Bob dressed like a slob , he kept a neat office . `` Okay , what happened '' ? ? `` About nine this morning Mrs. Buck phones me she's having trouble with one of her farm hands -- money trouble . Colored fellow named Tim Williams -- only hand she has working for her now . Tim come with the migratory workers that follow the crops up from the South last year , but Tim and his wife settled here . Never had no trouble with him before , thought he was a hard worker , hustling around to get a full week's work . Anyway , Julia asks me to . '' `` Julia '' ? ? `` Come on , Inspector , look alive . Julia Buck , the deceased '' , Moore said , slipping me his smug , idiot-grin again . `` Julia asks me to come out at once . But she didn't sound real alarmed you know , like there was any immediate danger . I got there at 9:47 A.M. , found her strangled . I would have come sooner if I'd known . No doubt about Tim being the killer -- I have a witness . Don't know why the County had to send anybody up here . Told them I can handle this '' . `` Yeah , seems you have a nice package , with all the strings tied . Who's '' ? ? `` I'll collar Tim before night '' . `` Who's your witness '' ? ? `` Julia had -- has -- an old Indian woman cooking for her -- Nellie Harris . Probably the last of the original Island Indians . Nellie was in the kitchen , had just come to work , when she heard Tim arguing with Julia in the living room . Swears she recognized his voice , that Tim yelled , ' It's my money and I want it ' ! ! And then rushed out of the house . Then she heard Julia phone me . Nellie went on with her house work -- until I found Julia dead . And before you say it , Nellie ain't near strong enough to have strangled Julia . There's no doubt this Tim sneaked back and killed Mrs. Buck . Another fact : Tim's disappeared -- on the run . But there's no way off the Point except through my road block . Guess you want to see the body -- have her up the street in Doc Abel's office '' . `` Let's see it '' . We walked up Main Street to this big white house , then around to the back . Being the Harbor's sole doctor , Abel was also its Medical Examiner . The corpse was on a table , covered by a sheet . Doc Abel was busy up front with some of his live patients . Pulling back the sheet , I examined the bruises around Julia Buck's once slender throat . Powerful hands had killed her . `` Find any prints '' ? ? Chief Moore shook his big head , seemed lost in thought as he stared at the nude body . Then he said , `` Never noticed it before I mean , when she was dressed but for a woman her age , Julia had a real fine figure '' . I dropped the sheet , glanced at my watch . It was almost one and I hadn't had lunch . Still , I wanted to get this over with , had a lot of paper work waiting in my own office . I told him , `` I want to go see the Buck house '' . `` Sure '' . Walking back down Main Street , I said , `` I saw the Harbor's one squad car at the road block , we'll ride out in my car '' . `` Naw , we'll use mine '' , Moore said , opening the door of a sleek white Jaguar roadster . As I slid in beside him he said , `` Some heap , hey ? ? Got a heck of a buy on this , dirt cheap '' . `` Yeah , it's a real load '' , I told him , looking up the street at my battered Ford . Five racing minutes later we pulled into the driveway of this typical two-story house , and when the Jaguar stopped I managed to swallow . There was a garage and a modern barn in the rear , all of it standing between two large flat fields planted in early potatoes . Everything shouted gentleman farming , the kind of grandfather-father-to-son folding money the Point is known for . The fins of a Caddy were sticking out of the garage , while the inside of the house was a comfortable mixture of old and expensive contemporary furniture . Nellie Harris wasn't old , she was ancient -- a tiny shriveled woman with a face like a tan prune . She was also stone deaf in her right ear . She calmly repeated what Moore had told me . When I asked , `` Why didn't you go into the living room to see how Mrs. Buck was '' ? ? The old gal stared at me with her hard eyes , said , `` She didn't call . I do the living room last . I went up stairs and did the bath and her bedroom -- way I always do in the morning '' . `` Have you any idea what this Tim and Mrs. Buck were arguing about '' ? ? `` Probably wages . Miss Julia was a hard woman with a dollar . Years ago when I asked her to put me in Social Security , so's I wouldn't have to be working now , Miss Julia threatened to fire me -- all because it would mean a few more dollars a year to her '' . `` Did you hear Tim return '' ? ? `` No sir . Nobody came until Chief Moore '' . I drummed on the kitchen table with my pencil . `` Mrs. Buck have any men friends '' ? ? `` Her '' ? ? The wrinkled mouth laughed , revealing astonishingly strong , white , teeth . `` I never see none . But then I wasn't her social secretary '' . `` Was she on friendly terms with other members of her family '' ? ? `` Didn't have no family -- around here . They had a son -- killed in the war '' . I walked into the living room . There didn't seem to be any signs of a struggle . I told Moore , `` Where does Tim's wife live '' ? ? `` I'll take you there . Look Jed , this is an open and shut case and I have to relieve my men at the road block soon . Okay , come on '' . We did 80 miles an hour across a hard dirt road to a cluster of shacks . In late summer migratory workers lived five and six to a room in these . Now they were empty , except for a cottage across the road . Mrs. Tim Williams was about 21 , with skin the color of bitter chocolate , and if you discounted the plain dress and worn slippers , she was startlingly pretty . The inside of their place was full of new furniture , five bucks down and a buck a week stuff , but all of it clean and full of the warmth of a home . Mrs. Williams was both sullen and frightened . She said she didn't know a thing -- Tim had left the house at six in the morning , as usual . She hadn't seen him since . `` Did Mrs. Buck owe him any wages '' ? ? I asked . `` Well , for this week , but they wasn't due 'till Saturday . Listen , Mr. Inspector , no matter what anybody say , my Tim didn't kill that woman ! ! Tim is a good man , hard working . He strong as a bull but gentle as a baby . Even if he angry , Tim wouldn't hurt a woman . He never in his life took a hand to a woman or '' `` We'll get him soon , see what he says '' , Chief Moore cut in . `` Does your husband have a car '' ? ? I asked . `` Got us an old station wagon . Need it for the job '' . I asked a silly question : `` You've no idea where your husband could be , now '' ? ? She shook her head . I knew she was lying . I stood there , staring at her for a moment -- thinking mostly of her beauty and her poverty . Moore said , `` Come on , Jed , I have to get to my men '' . On my way out I told her , `` If you should eh just happen to see your husband , get him to give himself up . He'll get a fair trial . Hiding out like this won't get him anything , except more trouble , or a bullet '' . `` Yes . I'll tell him -- if I see him '' . We made it back to the Harbor in less than four minutes . I tried not to act scared . That Jaguar could really barrel along . I told Moore I was going to eat , get some forms filled out by Doc Abel . Chief Moore said , `` If I don't see you when I return , see you for certain at my road block , Inspector '' . I had a bowl of decent chowder , phoned the Doc and he said he'd leave the death statements with his girl -- in a half hour . Lighting my pipe , I took a walk . The Harbor is a big yachting basin in the summer . Even now , there were several slick cruisers tied to the dock , an ocean-going yawl anchored inside the breakwater . There was a 34 foot Wheeler with Chief Bob's in big gold letters on its stern also tied up at the dock . It wasn't a new boat , about five years old , but fitted with fishing outriggers and chairs . I asked an old guy running a fishing station if the boat was Moore's . He said , `` You bet . Bob Moore is plumb crazy about blue fishing '' . I dropped into the doctor's office , picked up my forms . As I was walking back to the Police Station , which was in the same building with the City Hall and Post Office , I saw Mrs. Tim Williams sneaking into the back of my car . If she moved gracefully , she was clumsy at it . I got into the front seat . She was ' hiding ' on the floor of the back seat , the soft curves of her back and hips -- rousing lines . I drove out of the Harbor , turned off into a dirt road among the scrub pine trees and stopped . I waited a few minutes and she sat up . For another moment we didn't talk , then she began to weep . She mumbled , `` I just know that Chief Moore is out to kill my Tim '' ! ! `` Maybe . I never saw him so anxious before '' , I said , lighting my pipe and offering her a cigarette . `` Of course , it could be because this is his first murder case . You know where Tim is , don't you , Mrs. Williams '' ? ? She puffed on the cigarette slowly , sitting slumped against the back seat ; ; didn't answer . But the police have dropped the case . I want you to go to Pearson City and find out why -- first-hand stuff for your modern crime series . Take the same train Diana Beauclerk took and get there at the same time . Go to the same hotel and occupy the same suite -- 1105 '' . `` Will the hotel rent it so soon after the crime '' ? ? `` Why not ? ? The police have finished with it . Besides , the number of the suite hasn't been published in any newspaper . To the hotel people , you'll just be an innocent tourist who happens to ask for that particular suite '' . `` Still , they may not want to rent it '' . `` That's your headache . Once inside , keep your eyes open '' ! ! `` For what '' ! ! Alec was growing more and more skeptical . `` The police will have gone over every square inch of the place with a fine-tooth comb . The hotel people will have scoured and vacuumed it . Ten to one , it's even been redecorated '' ! ! `` There's always a chance they may have overlooked something '' , returned the chief . `` I'm betting on that chance . Interview the bellboy and chambermaid who waited on Beauclerk . Study the topography of the suite . Soak up local color . Reenact everything Beauclerk did . Try to imagine you're going to be murdered yourself -- between eleven p.m. and one a.m. the night you arrive '' . Alec smirked . `` Cheerful way to spend an evening '' ! ! A sudden thought wiped the smirk from his face . `` Suppose the murderer should return to the scene of the crime '' ! ! The chief's eyes gleamed . He spoke softly . `` That is exactly what I'm hoping for . After all , the murderer is still at large . And the key to the suite is still missing '' . On the train Alec refreshed his memory of the Beauclerk case by reading teletype flimsies -- spot-news stories about the crime sent out by the Pearson City Star , a member of the Syndicate Press . Diana Beauclerk was a second-rate actress living in New York . Two weeks ago she had gone west to Pearson City . Daniel Forbes , her divorced husband , lived there . So did the firm of lawyers who had got her the divorce , Kimball and Stacy . She reached Pearson City at nine p.m. and went straight to the Hotel Westmore . She telephoned the junior partner of her law firm , Martin Stacy , and asked him to call at her hotel that evening . At the time of her divorce Forbes had promised to pay her a lump sum in lieu of further alimony if she remarried . According to Stacy , she told him she was planning to remarry and she wanted him to ask Forbes for the lump sum . Stacy replied that it would bankrupt Forbes , who had just sunk all his money in a real estate venture . Stacy said he left her suite at nine forty-five p.m. . She was in good health and spirits , but still determined to get the money from Forbes . No one saw Stacy leave . No other visitor inquired for her that evening . Next morning she was found dead in her suite with a bullet from a Colt revolver in her brain . According to the medical examiner , she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Her door was locked and the key was missing . So was the gun . When Alec finished reading he was sure that either Forbes or Stacy had killed Diana Beauclerk . Forbes had motive and Stacy had opportunity . Find a motive for Stacy or an opportunity for Forbes and the case would be solved . The Hotel Westmore proved to be one of the older hotels in Pearson City , and definitely second-rate . Alec's first impression of the lobby was gloomy , Victorian dignity -- black walnut and red plush , a black and white tiled floor , and Persian rugs . He studied the night clerk as a man measures an adversary . `` I'd like the room I had the last time '' . `` Certainly , sir '' . The clerk was young and limp , with a tired smile . `` Do you recall the number '' ? ? `` It was 1105 '' . The clerk's smile congealed . `` That suite is taken '' . Alec's glance went to a chart of guest names and room numbers hanging on the wall behind the clerk . Opposite the number 1105 stood one word : Unoccupied . The clerk's glance followed Alec's . `` We have better rooms vacant now '' , he babbled . `` Larger and more comfortable . At the same rate '' . Alec's face was dark , blunt , and sulky . He always looked impertinent and he could look dangerous . He was looking dangerous now . He raised his voice . `` Anything wrong with the plumbing in 1105 '' ? ? There was a sudden stillness in the lobby . Two women , who had been chattering like parrots , were struck dumb . A man , lighting a match for his cigar , paused until the flame burned his fingers . Even the bellboys on their bench were listening . The clerk's eyes flickered . `` Of course not '' ! ! `` Anybody with a contagious disease been in there '' ? ? `` No '' ! ! The clerk was almost hysterical . `` It's just that -- well , 1105 is being redecorated '' . `` I don't believe it '' . Alec leaned on the desk , holding the clerk's eyes with his . `` Suppose you tell me the real reason '' , he drawled . `` There might be a story in it '' . `` St-story '' ? ? `` I'm with the Syndicated Press , Feature Service . Either I get the story -- or I get the suite '' . It was blackmail and the clerk knew it . `` There is no story '' , he piped tremulously . `` Front ! ! Show this gentleman to 1105 '' ! ! The stillness persisted as Alec followed a bellboy across the lobby to the elevator . He could feel eyes on his back . He wished it had not been necessary to announce the number of his suite quite so publicly . The corridor on the eleventh floor was dimly lighted by electric globes at intervals of thirty feet . A thick , crimson carpet muffled every footfall . At the end of the corridor Alec noticed a door marked : Fire Stairs . It was a neat setup for murder . The bellboy unlocked a white door numbered 1105 . The room was dark but a neon sign flashed and faded beyond the window . A few snowflakes sifted down through that theatrical red glow , languid as falling feathers . Hastily the boy switched on a ceiling light . The room looked normal and even commonplace . There was no hint of a violent struggle now . Deal furniture with a mahogany finish was neatly arranged as if it stood in the window of a department store . The blue rug was suspiciously bright and new . It had never been stained with blood . Table covers and towels were clean , ashtrays empty and supplied with fresh matches . The mirror over the bureau was a blank eye , round and innocent . Alec played the part of an innocent tourist . `` Is there anything wrong with this room '' ? ? `` N-no '' . The boy dropped his eyes . `` Afraid you'll lose your job if you don't keep your mouth shut '' ? ? The boy raised his eyes . `` Listen , mister . If you want my advice , pack up and take the next train back to New York '' . `` Were you on duty here two weeks ago '' ? ? The boy hesitated . Then , `` I'm not talking . But I wouldn't spend a night in here for a million bucks '' ! ! He was in a hurry to get out of the room . Alec gave him a tip and let him go . Alone , Alec examined the doors . There were three -- one leading to a bathroom , one to the hall , and one to the room next door which was immovable -- locked or bolted on the other side . Alec locked the hall door and put the key with his watch on the bedside table . It was just quarter of nine . As he ranged his belongings on the bureau he noticed a film of white dust on the dark surface of the wood beyond the linen cover . Not gray like the dust that collects in an unused room , but white . Women didn't use white face powder nowadays , he recalled . They used pink , tan , or cream powder . Alec glanced into the bathroom . Blood in the bathtub where the murderer appears to have washed his hands . It seemed clean now , but Alec decided against a bath . He crawled into bed and switched off the light . In the darkness he could see the rosy reflection of the neon sign on the wall opposite the window . It winked as steadily as a metronome -- on , off -- on , off . In less than five minutes Alec was asleep . He never knew just what woke him . Yet suddenly he was wide-awake . There was no sound and apparently no movement in the room except the noiseless pulsation of the red light on the wall . He lay still , listening to the silence , watching the light . Somewhere in the city a big clock sounded twelve solemn notes -- midnight . According to the medical examiner she was shot between eleven p.m. and one a.m. . Alec heard a faint sound . His heart seemed to swell and knock against the wall of his chest . For the sound was inside the room . He let his eyelids droop and breathed heavily , feigning sleep . The sound was coming nearer . A monstrous shadow fell across the illuminated wall , distorted and indefinable . When the neon sign faded out , the shadow disappeared . When the neon sign flashed on , the shadow was still there . It stretched to an impossible height , climbing the wall to the ceiling . That meant that something between the light and its reflection on the wall was moving closer to the source of the light -- in this case , the window . Cautiously Alec tensed his muscles , ready to jump . The bedsprings betrayed him with a creak . The shadow vanished . Someone had moved beyond the range of the light from the window . Abandoning caution , Alec leaped out of bed and groped for the light switch . Before he could snap it on , a stinging blow caught him in the ribs . He lashed out blindly with his right . There was a thick , squashy crack of fist on flesh . Something hard grazed his knuckles . He put everything he had into the next and aimed down where the stomach ought to be . Rough cloth rasped his fist . There was a grunt , curiously inarticulate , like that of an animal in pain . Something heavy shook the floor as it dropped . Alec waited a moment , on guard . Nothing happened . Again he groped for the light switch . The blue rug had been rolled up and stacked in one corner of the room . On the bare floorboards a man lay face down . He had a short , heavy , powerful body . Alec turned him over and discovered a round , lumpy face with narrow , slanting eyes -- a primitive Tartar face from Russia or the Balkans . The man's shoes were too pointed , his overcoat too broad at the shoulders and too narrow at the waist . There was a slight bulge under the left armpit -- a shoulder holster . Alec promptly removed the gun . He was familiar with this type . He had seen it in the lineup at Police Headquarters in New York , in Broadway night clubs and Seventh Avenue pool rooms , in the criminal courts . But he was surprised to meet it here . Diana Beauclerk had no connection with the underworld . A professional gunman would not have killed her with a weapon of such small caliber as a . Nor would he choose a respectable hotel as the scene for a killing when it would be so much safer to take his victim for a one-way ride on a lonely country road . The man's eyelids fluttered . He opened his eyes . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? Demanded Alec . The man made no reply . His eyes were dazed . His lips were bruised and swollen where Alec had hit him . `` Did you kill Diana Beauclerk '' ? ? Alec expected an indignant denial , but there was no response at all . `` Oh , come on , snap out of it ! ! Or I'll turn you over to the police '' ! ! The silence was getting on Alec's nerves . The man opened his mouth , but no words came . Only that curious , animal grunting Alec had heard during their fight . `` Don't you speak English '' ? ? The man opened his mouth wider . A forefinger pointed toward his gullet . Alec leaned forward to look . There were hideous scars inside the throat and the palate was mutilated . In good time I shall get to the distressing actuality , to Red McIver and Handley Walker , to murder and sudden death . But you realize , I am sure , how much old deeds incite to new ones , and you must forgive me if I tell you first of the old ones . It was in 1814 that Abraham Wharf and his sister sat by a meager fire in their house on Dogtown Common , a desolate place even then . He was sharpening his razor . `` Sister '' , said he `` do you think people who commit suicide go to heaven '' ? ? And she answered , `` I don't know , but I hope you'll never do such a thing '' . Without a tremor , `` God forbid '' ! ! He said , and went out and cut his throat in the cave near Granny Day's swamp . What has this to do with the present ? ? Much , I assure you . You must know what gets into people , even such as Red and Handley , before you can tell what comes out of them . They had learned , both of them , about Abraham Wharf . That's why I beg you not to forget him . His ghost is not laid . Red and Handley , God help them , knew the old Dogtown lore ; ; and I knew they knew it , for I'd told them a lot of it . And isn't it true that you get a deeper perception about a man and his motives when you know what it is he knows ? ? Yes , gentlemen , I am getting to the point , to my point . You know the facts ; ; they are set forth in your own newspapers . You want from me the story , but a story is about ' why ' and then , perhaps , about how . The ' when ' you know ; ; yesterday morning . So what I am trying to tell you is the ' why ' -- that is my point -- and that concerns the spirit of the matter . There is an inwardness and a luster to old furniture ( look at that mahogany highboy behind you ) which has a provocative emanation , if I may say so . Places , too , have their haunting qualities . Even people . And my point in this sad story is the spirit of the matter . When you hold the spirit of a thing , then somehow you know the truth -- you know a fake antique from the real thing . And the truth is what you've come for , is it not ? ? Now , Dogtown is one of those places that creeps into the marrow as worms get into old wood , under the veneer . In fact , all the folk who lived on the back of Cape Ann , they are not just like others . There's a different hall-mark on them . There were no witch burnings here because everyone had a witch in the family . Just think of old Granther Stannard who pulled the teeth of Dark Younger ( her real name was Dorcas ) , and because he bungled the job and left two protruding tusks she put such a hex on him that he thought his legs were made of glass . After that he was never known to run or even walk fast . Today Dogtown is the only deserted village in all New England that I know of . There it sits , a small highland , with towns like Gloucester near by ; ; but now it's the most lost and tortured place in the world . Those who lived in that desolation of rocky deformity took on some of the moraine's stony character . Scientists say it is the last spewings of a great glacier , but one rather feels that only a malevolent giant could have piled up those crouching monsters of granite which still seem to preserve a sort of suspended , ominous life in them . We'll walk up there later . It's perhaps a mile from here where we sit . And not one single dwelling left there , though once , in the early eighteenth century , there were close to a hundred houses . ( I myself have identified about sixty sites , from the old maps and registers . A fascinating pursuit , I assure you . ) Even I can remember nothing but ruined cellars and tumbled pillars , and nobody has lived there in the memory of any living man . It is now a sweep of boulders and ledges , with oak , walnut and sumac creeping across the common , and everywhere the ruins and the long , long shadows . That's your setting , and a sinister one . Please get that in your reports . It accounts for so many things . Both Red McIver and Handley Walker lived nearby , almost as near as I do . Red lived at Lanesville , and from his house he could be up on the Common in a half hour's brisk walk ; ; Handley lived further on , at Pigeon Cove . I'd often find one or other of them up around Dogtown sketching . They were both painters , ( They were ? ? They are ? ? What should one say ? ? ) Well , anyhow , Dogtown Common is so much off the beaten track nowadays that only Sunday picnickers still stray up there , from time to time . Sea-road , railroad , lack of water , killed Dogtown . Dead , dead as a brass door nail , and I sometimes feel like the Sexton , for I'm about the last to be even interested . I knew Red and Handley well . As I said , they were both painters . They'd come , separately , to Gloucester some twenty years ago -- there's always been an artists' colony somewhere on Cape Ann -- and each married here . They married cousins , Anta and Freya Norberg . There are a lot of Scandinavians in this neck of the woods , and many still make painted furniture and take steam-baths . Pretty girls among them , with blonde hair and pert faces . Handley married Freya and Red , of the red beard , married Anta . And it was because of an old Norberg inheritance that I got to understand them all so well . The quarrel ended in a ridiculous draw , but I must tell you about it . Oh , yes , I'm quite sure it's important , because of the Beech Pasture . What's that ? ? Why , that's what gave me the feeling , gave me as-it-were the spirit , the demoniac , evil spirit of this whole affair . You see , besides being custodian of antiquities , I am also registrar . No , I don't hold with those who live entirely among dead things . I know as well as the next man that a ship is called from the rigging she carries , where the live wind blows , and not from the hull . But you've got to know both . What's below the water-line interests me also . As I was saying , I've known all about the old records , including the old Norberg deed . Some ten years ago that page was torn out , I don't know by whom . About five years ago , Handley came to ask me if he could see the tattered register . He was courteous and casual about it , as though it were of no consequence . He's always like that , in spite of being a big man . ( When you see him , you'll notice his habit of fingering , I might almost say , stroking a large mole with black hairs on it , by his right temple . ) A sensual man , but very courteous , some would say slick . Like his glossy black hair . Too many outside manners , to my taste . He is the sort who , with an appraising eye , would cross the street to help a strange woman on to a bus and then pinch her . A real gentleman , I feel , would do neither . He's always worn a broad-brimmed hat , and I've noticed , in my small study at the Society , that he rather smells of cosmetics . The next week , cousin Red wandered in as casually , but curt and untidy . Red was small and fine-boned , like ivory-inlay . He too asked to see the same page . When I told him someone had torn it out , he shouted . `` By God , it's that damn Handley , the sneak '' ! ! And later in the same week they both came together to examine the register . Fortunately we were alone in the building -- so few people nowadays are interested even in their own past or in the lovely craft of other days -- for they began to abuse each other in the foulest language . Red thrusting out his tawny beard , Handley glowering under his suddenly rumpled black hair . They actually bristled . Le rouge et le noir . Violent men both . Red always was morose , yet that day the dapper Handley was the louder of the two . But for my presence , they would have been at each others' throats . During the quarrel I learned what the trouble was , from the accusations each hurled at the other . The Beech Pasture had suddenly become valuable . There's a fine granite quarry there , and granite's coming back for public buildings . Both men knew it was in the Norberg family holdings , but to which of the cousins did it belong , Anta or Freya ? ? Fortunately , I knew almost exactly what the will had said . It began with a preamble , of course . This explained that the judge of probate of Essex County , 1785 or 1786 , appointed three free-holders of Gloucester to divide and establish the Norberg estate . After the usual Honorable Sirs , it went on to say that there had been set off to the widow one full third part of the real estate of the deceased Salu Norberg , one lower room , on the Western side , privileges to the well and bake-oven and to one third of the cellar ( I can show you the cellar when we go up ) , also one Cow Right , and lastly they set off to the widow her own land that she brought with her as dower , namely the Beech Pasture . And I remember that the whole of the privileges , not counting the Beech Pasture , was valued at twenty pounds . I wish you could have seen the crests fall on these two sparring coxcombs when I told them that obviously the pasture belonged to their wives jointly . That battle scene , ridiculous as it was , remained in my mind . A disturbing picture of bad blood , to be further heightened with illicit if buccolic colors , for on a subsequent day I saw Handley escorting Anta , Red's wife , up on Dogtown Common . I felt it would be inopportune to disclose my presence . Not that I intentionally go unperceived , but the boulders up there are very high and I am a small woman . One other cause of jealousy between them I must tell you . Paint ! ! Gloomy and unkempt as Red McIver was , he was much the better painter . I suppose Handley knew it . If Red had a show at Gloucester , Handley would hurry to hang his pictures in Rockport . You may say this has little pertinence , but , gentlemen , remember that all this prepared my mind , alerted my intelligence . By such touches the pattern takes shape . You would call these the motives of crime . I would call them the patterns of life , perhaps even the designs of destiny . Yet with all this knowledge I had nothing of substance to unravel our case , as you would call it , till yesterday . One month ago , on the 20th of October , was the opening of the gunning season in Massachusetts . Not much to shoot , but there are a few pheasant . Rabbits , too , if you care for them , which most of the folk around here haven't the sense to appreciate . Any more than they have the sense to eat mussels . That was the day Red was said to have gone away . Oh yes , he'd talked about doing so . In fact , he often disappeared , from time to time , -- off to paint the sea , aboard a dragger out from Gloucester . Anta , his wife , never seemed to mind . I suppose these absences gave her more clearance for her embraces with Cousin Handley . Anyhow , I wasn't surprised , early that morning , to see Handley himself crossing from Dogtown Common Road to the Back Road . No , he didn't have his gun , which he should have . It would have been a good excuse for his being there at all . I myself had been up there by seven o'clock , after mushrooms , since there'd been a week of rain which had stopped early that morning and the day was as clear as Sandwich glass . That's what the man had said . Haney peered doubtfully at his drinking companion through bleary , tear-filled eyes . He had no ready answer , as much from surprise as from the fit of coughing . Was the man drunk or crazy or both ? ? But his new-found buddy had matched him drink for drink until he lost count , and the man's eyes were still clear . The guy is off his rocker , Haney thought to himself , and looked away from those eyes . Eyes that were clear , but also bright with a strange intensity , a sort of cold fire burning behind them . Why hadn't he noticed it before ? ? No , the man was not drunk He wondered how he got tied up with this stranger . But , of course , he remembered now . It was blurred , after two hours of steady drinking , but the occasion of it came back to him . The stranger , his head seemingly sunk in thought , started to cross the street against the light just as a huge moving van roared through the intersection . Brakes howled and a horn blared furiously , but the man would have been hit if Phil hadn't called out to him a second before . His shout had been involuntary , something anybody might have done without thinking , on the spur of the moment . As a matter of fact , he wouldn't have cared at all if the guy had been hit . Actually , he regretted having opened his mouth when the truck came to a stop and the angry driver jumped down from the cab and walked back toward them . By then , the stranger was thanking Haney profusely and had one arm around his shoulders as if he were an old friend . So the driver started to curse at both of them as if they had been in a plot together to ruin his safe-driving record . Then the man he saved turned and looked squarely into the truck driver's face , without saying a word . Very suddenly , the driver stopped swearing at them , turned on his heel and went back to his truck . Haney hadn't given it much thought at the time . Now he recalled it very clearly , and wondered what the truck driver had seen in those eyes to make him back off . It must have been the sort of look that can call a bluff without saying a word . When the light went their way , they went on across the street . And when the stranger found out that Phil was on the way to one of his favorite bars , he insisted on offering to buy drinks for both of them . Phil usually went alone and kept to himself , sitting in a corner and passing the time by nursing his favorite grudges . But he decided he wouldn't mind company in return for free drinks , even though he made good money at his job . Phil was like that . Now he wondered if it was worth it , having a screwball for company . He really didn't take the offer seriously , but he began to feel uneasy . When he finally got the coughing under control , he realized that Pete ( all he gave was his first name ) was still waiting for an answer -- he didn't even seem to wink as he continued to stare . Haney managed a weak laugh . `` Guess I can't think of anyone , Pete . Thanks anyhow '' . A faint crease appeared between the man's eyebrows . `` I think you aren't taking me seriously , Phil . I meant it . And everybody has some kind of grudge . I might have got hit by that truck if it wasn't for you . I believe in returning favors . I'll do anything for somebody I like . It won't cost you a cent , Phil . Go ahead and try me '' ! ! Phil rubbed his forehead wearily . He was beginning to feel woolly . Maybe it would be better to humor the guy and then make an exit . He really didn't expect anything to come of it , and there were a few people `` All right '' , he conceded finally , `` if you must know , I don't get along with the landlord . He keeps riding me because I like to listen to the radio and sing while I'm taking a bath . He says the neighbors complain , but I don't believe it . Why don't they tell me themselves if it bothers them '' ? ? The man closed his eyes and nodded . When he looked up again , he seemed almost contented . `` Fine . Give me your address . It will take a little time . I want to study your landlord's habits and movements first . You see , I always make it look like an accident . Maybe suicide , if it looks reasonable . In that way there's no trouble for the customer '' . Haney's eyebrows flew up . `` Customer '' ? ? Pete smiled modestly . `` It's my line of work '' , he said Five minutes later , before Haney could make his break , the stranger stood up and nodded farewell . Haney watched the small but wiry man slip out the door quickly and silently , and felt relieved to see that nobody else seemed to notice his departure . Phil decided to stay a little longer , and as time passed it seemed as if the strange little man had never been there , but for the other glass on the table . Some time before midnight he returned to his apartment and hit the sack , putting the whole incident out of mind before he fell asleep . The next day , Sunday , the hangover reminded Haney where he had been the night before . The hangover in turn reminded him of his conversation with the weirdy , and he groaned . He went for more aspirin later in the day , and passed the surly landlord on the way -- he was still alive and scowling as usual , as if tenants were a burden in his life . Phil shrugged and ignored him . He went back to work Monday . By Wednesday the landlord was still alive . Of course On Thursday , Haney mailed the monthly check for separate maintenance to his wife Lolly , and wished the stranger could do something about her Coming home from work , he was startled to see a police car parked in front of the apartment building . Inside the lobby , people were standing around , talking excitedly . His spine crawled with a foreboding premonition as he asked one of his fellow tenants what had happened . The landlord had died . Late that afternoon , it seemed , he had fallen off the roof while on some obscure errand or inspection . He had apparently been alone . Nobody witnessed the fall -- just the sickening impact when his body smashed on the pavement just outside the basement delivery entrance . Haney hoped that nobody noticed his sudden pallor , as he felt the blood drain from his cheeks . He muttered something about how terrible it was , and walked with deliberate slowness to the elevator . Once inside his apartment , he poured a drink with trembling hands and flopped limply in a chair . After a while he began to feel better about it , especially when no one bothered to ask any questions . But after all , why should they ? ? Still later , he finally convinced himself that it was an accident -- just a coincidence . The stranger really had nothing to do with it , of course Haney went to bed , happy that at least he was rid of that lousy landlord . After all , the man had no family , so no one suffered , and everybody was better off for it . Really , he said to himself , nobody kills a man just as a favor ! ! So you thought I didn't mean what I said . The stranger's eyes were large and sad , as if Phil Haney had hurt his feelings . It was like a recurrent , annoying dream , but now the dream was beginning to take on overtones of a nightmare . However , Haney knew it was not a dream . He might be very tight , but he knew where he was . It was the same bar , and it was two weeks later -- Saturday night , when he had an excuse to drink heavier than usual . He had been sitting in the usual corner at the little table , as far as possible from any talkative , friendly lushes . He was enjoying the weekly ritual of washing down his pet grievance with bourbon slightly moistened with water . This favorite grievance was not the landlord . He had already quite forgotten about him . In fact , he had only mentioned him on the spur of the moment . His real grievance was Lolly . Toward the end of his fourth hairy highball , while he was moodily making wet rings on the table-top with the bottom of the glass , he became aware that he was not alone . He looked up with bloodshot eyes and beheld the stranger sitting across the table , smiling a secret smile at him , as if they were fellow conspirators . He hadn't even noticed -- what was his name ? ? Pete ? ? -- he hadn't seen him sit down . The man was uncanny , like a shadow , and made as much noise as a shadow . Haney felt like shrinking out of sight , but he was already trapped in the corner with the wiry , dark little man . He began to wish that he hadn't shouted that other evening when the truck bore down through the crossing . Was he going to be saddled from now on with a creep for a bar-buddy ? ? He'd have to start going to some of the other places again . In a low voice , almost whispering , the man had asked Phil if he was happy with the way the landlord had been taken off his back . He made the mistake of answering in an offhand way , and instantly realized that his skepticism must have showed in his face or voice . Pete frowned slightly , then became sad and moody . Haney didn't want to encourage his company , but felt he ought to buy him a drink anyhow , to prevent possible trouble . But there was no trouble . The guy sulked over his drink , obviously upset by Haney's lack of appreciation . To break the uncomfortable silence , Haney began to talk . In time , and two drinks later , he was complaining bitterly about his wife , He was on the subject for ten minutes or so when he noticed the renewed interest in his listener -- it showed in the alert face and the suddenly bright eyes . When he paused to moisten his throat , the stranger broke in . `` But why pay her bills ? ? If she runs around with other men , and if you hate her as you say , why not just divorce her '' ? ? Haney scowled . `` That bitch would love a divorce '' , he growled . `` Then she'd get half of everything I have . Community property deal -- you know . I'd have to sell out my business to pay her off with her share . She can drop dead '' ! ! Pete nodded understandingly . `` Oh yes . Now I see . You must understand , I haven't been in this state too long . I came out here to retire . That's why I -- why I do a free job now and then . You should have told me about her before '' . Haney felt a twinge of annoyance when he heard the now familiar line again . Then a wild thought ran circles through his clouded brain . Suppose -- just suppose this guy was really what he said he was ! ! A retired professional killer If he was just a nut , no harm was done . But if he was the real thing , he could do something about Lolly . He felt very cunning , very proud of himself as he played on the other man's soft spot . `` No offense intended '' , he said gently . `` But it's just that -- well , you know . The cops didn't suspect a thing , and I thought it was a coincidence . After all , I didn't know you , Pete . It could have been an accident '' . He shrugged casually . `` But if you say you managed it '' The stranger was hooked . His eyes burned feverishly . `` Yes , yes '' , he muttered impatiently . `` Of course it looked like an accident . I always work it that way -- and always at a time when the customer has an alibi . Let me prove it , Phil . I think I can manage one more favor for you '' . He waited eagerly . Haney swished the liquor in the bottom of his glass . About halfway back Pops groped against a wall and stopped , pulled away two loosely nailed wide boards at one end , and went through . `` C'mon '' , he whispered ; ; `` floor level's about three feet down , so don't fall '' . I went through and down , into pitch darkness . He said , `` Jist stay still . I'll pull the boards back and then get us a light . Jist stay where you are '' . I jist stayed where I was while he fumbled around and then walked away . A moment later he struck a match and lighted a candle , and I could see . It was a big room , empty except for a few things of Pops's at the far end -- a wooden crate on which stood the candle , a spread out blanket , and an unrolled bindle . I looked back over my shoulder while I went to join him ; ; he'd hung another half of a blanket over the boarded window so no light would show through . I took the pint bottle from my pocket and handed it over as I sat down beside him on the spread blanket . `` You first '' , I said . He drank and handed it back . `` Nice place '' , I told him . `` Listen , I got a buddy I travel with , real nice guy named Larry . I know where he is , right near here . Could he join the party and sleep here tonight too ? ? We'll both be blowing town tomorrow so we won't be moving in on you '' . He hesitated a second , looking at the bottle , before he said `` Sure-sure '' , and I reassured him . `` He'll bring a bottle too , and I'll get another one or maybe two while I'm out . You can work on this one while I'm gone , kill it if you want '' . I took a short swallow from it myself and handed it to him . His `` sure-sure '' was enthusiastic this time . He put the bottle down . `` Git over by the window while there's light , an' I'll put th' candle out . When yuh come back I'll put it out agin till you're both inside '' . Charlie was waiting , leaning against a building front . `` Perfect set-up '' , I told him . `` But we got to go back to Fifth and get another bottle or two . On the way I'll give you the scoop '' . On the way I gave him the scoop . I bought another pint of sherry and when we got back Pops let us in in the dark , put back the blanket and then lighted the candle again . I introduced my friend Larry to Pops and we made ourselves comfortable . There was still a little , not much , left in the first bottle and we passed it around once and killed it , and Charlie opened his . I was reminded , amusedly , by a poem of Kenneth Patchen's called The Murder of Two Men by a Young Kid Wearing Lemon Colored Gloves , which Patchen himself read on a record against jazz background . The poem consisted of only two words , the word `` Wait '' , repeated over and over at irregular intervals and with different inflections , and then the word `` Now '' ! ! And a blaring final chord from the jazz group . This was the same , except that it was the murder of one man by two men and neither of us was wearing gloves . But we could wait all right ; ; there was no hurry . I said , `` Wait wait '' to Charlie and he grinned , digging the reference . We'd heard the record together once . The second bottle passed a few times . Pops was taking long ones , but not showing the effect yet . He seemed as drunk as when I'd first talked to him , but no drunker . He had a capacity ; ; if we'd really been trying to get him dead drunk we'd have had to go out for more wine . About halfway through the second bottle , Charlie looked at me across Pops , who was sitting between us and asked `` Now '' ? ? I said , `` Wait '' , and handed the bottle to Pops for his final drink . When he handed it back and I had hold of it safely , Pops was looking toward me and I said `` Now '' , to Charlie and he swung the short length of lead pipe he'd meanwhile taken from his pocket , once . It was a lead pipe cinch . There was a sound like the one you produce by flicking a watermelon with your finger , only louder , and Pops fell forward from the waist and then over sidewise . Out cold , if not dead ; ; and he'd never known what hit him -- he'd never known that anything had hit him . I reached my hand toward him to put it inside his shirt to feel for a heartbeat , but Charlie said `` Wait '' ! ! -- and said it sharply , not as in the Patchen bit , but as an order -- so I stopped my hand and looked at him . He was holding the piece of lead pipe out to me . `` We don't want to know whether he's dead , yet . I gauged that blow to be borderline . To kayo him and maybe or maybe not kill . You hit again about twice that hard before we know whether he's dead or not . That way we'll never know which of us really killed him and which was just the accomplice . Dig '' ? ? I dug him , I saw his point ; ; it made sense . I took the piece of pipe from Charlie's hand and used it , harder than he had . The thunk was louder , anyway , and I thought I heard bone crack . Charlie said , `` Good boy . That did it , if mine didn't . And we'll never know which . All right , now I'll give you a hand '' . We straightened Pops up and I made sure there was no trace of a heartbeat . I nodded to Charlie . `` Let's put him down again the way he was . It's a more natural position '' . We did that . `` How do you feel '' ? ? Charlie asked me . `` Cool '' , I told him . `` What do you feel '' ? ? `` Nothing . Well maybe I'm exaggerating . It was a kick , but not a big enough one for me to want to take the chance again , except for stakes . But let's not talk about it abstractly until we're out of here . Now , first question : the bottles . Shall we take them all with us , or leave one '' ? ? `` Take them '' , I said . `` If we left one we'd have to wipe it for fingerprints . Here's the picture we want to leave for the fuzz -- whenever the body gets found . This happened in the middle of a drinking bout with another bum . If they'd been working on a bottle or a jug he'd have taken it with him '' . `` Right . And he'd have taken the weapon with him too , so we take that . Now '' -- He looked around . `` I've been careful about fingerprints . How about you '' ? ? `` Same . There are the boards over the window , of course , but they're not painted and too rough to take prints . Same goes for the rough cement of the ledge . Besides , I doubt if the cops will even try dusting . They find dead winos every day , maybe they won't even autopsy him for the cause of death '' . `` We can't take a chance on that . We've got to assume they'll decide he was murdered and we've got to keep the picture consistent . Our hypothetical other bum who killed him would have turned out his pockets . Let's do that '' . We did that and found a dirty handkerchief , some matches and fourteen cents in change . We took the matches -- they were book matches and once they'd been touched might retain fingerprints -- and the change . We discussed the candle and decided the hypothetical other bum would have left it burning to light his way to the window and because he'd have no reason to blow it out . The candle had been stuck on a tin lid so it wouldn't set fire to the crate when it guttered out . A fire wouldn't have mattered except that it would cause Pops to be found sooner . He might not be found for days , even weeks , otherwise . We went once more over every point , then triple-checked . Being picked up for questioning by a cop on the way out seemed to be the only possible remaining danger , and we weren't picked up by a cop . In fact , nobody saw us , cop or citizen . Winsett is a quiet street with no taverns and was completely deserted at that hour . Which , if it matters , was one A.M. . Less than three hours ago we'd decided , in Maxine Wells's pad on Cosmo , to commit a trial murder . It had gone like clockwork . Almost too smoothly , I found myself thinking , and then told myself that was ridiculous . How safe is too safe ? ? Thinking like that can get you into a padded pad . An hour later we were back in my unpadded pad , killing what had been left of the second pint . We decided to leave the third one intact for tomorrow . Also our plans for me to commit Charlie's murder and for him to commit mine . But we were really going to do it . We shook hands on it . We planned ahead only one step , a rendezvous for tomorrow when we could swap notes . I'd tell him everything I'd learned about Seaton's habits and habitat , and he'd tell me the score on Radic . We made the date for two o'clock in the afternoon at Maxine Wells's pad . Charlie would get there early because he had the key . From here on in , the less Charlie and I were seen together in public , or visited one another's rooms , the better . I was dead tired and slept soundly , as far as I know dreamlessly . We met at Maxine's and decided we were set to stay as long as it took , into or even through the evening , to talk things out . Charlie had brought food and we'd decided on no drinks . I'd brought along the virgin pint from last night , but we were going to kill that only when we were through talking . I talked first , telling him everything I knew about Seaton and his house and domestic arrangements . I drew diagrams and floor plans ; ; he memorized them thoroughly and then we tore them into tiny pieces and flushed them down . He gave me equivalent and even more detailed dope on Radic , including diagrams -- one of the apartment building Radic lived in and one of the apartment itself . He'd been there several times , back when , while he and Radic had been friends , or at least not enemies . It didn't take us as long as we'd thought it might ; ; it was not quite six o'clock when we finished and Charlie said , `` Well , I guess that's it . Shall we flip a coin to see which of us goes first ? ? Or would you rather deal a hand of show-down poker or play a game of gin rummy , or what '' ? ? `` Wait a minute , Charlie '' , I said . `` One thing we haven't discussed , expense money . We'll need some at least , if only bus fare to the scene of the crime . And if you're as flat broke as I am , I think we'll have to take the added risk of knocking over a filling station or something before we split for one of us to set up an alibi while the other does his dirty work '' . He sighed . `` All right , I'll come clean . I've got a little stashed for a rainy day , and I guess this is rainy enough . A couple of hundred . If you draw the short straw I'll lend you some bread , like fifty bucks , before I take off to visit my sister in Frisco . Then , after I'm back , another fifty so you can put some mileage on yourself and have a solid alibi somewhere while I take care of your seat cover boy '' . `` Solid '' , I said . I took a deep breath , and the plunge . `` In that case , let's not draw . I'll go to bat first . You'd have to wait till Seaton's back from Mexico City and also while I set it up with Doris to have her have an alibi for D-night . So it wouldn't be for days or even a week before you could do anything . But your friend Manny can go any time '' . He grinned and clapped me on the shoulder . `` I was hoping you'd say that , Willy . But I wouldn't have suggested it . Well -- in that case , I take off tomorrow morning for Frisco . And , in case , I brought the money with me '' . Now that he knew himself to be self he was free to grok ever closer to his brothers , merge without let . Self's integrity was and is and ever had been . Mike stopped to cherish all his brother selves , the many threes-fulfilled on Mars , corporate and discorporate , the precious few on Earth -- the unknown powers of three on Earth that would be his to merge with and cherish now that at last long waiting he grokked and cherished himself . Mike remained in trance ; ; there was much to grok , loose ends to puzzle over and fit into his growing -- all that he had seen and heard and been at the Archangel Foster Tabernacle ( not just cusp when he and Digby had come face to face alone ) why Bishop Senator Boone made him warily uneasy , how Miss Dawn Ardent tasted like a water brother when she was not , the smell of goodness he had incompletely grokked in the jumping up and down and wailing -- Jubal's conversations coming and going -- Jubal's words troubled him most ; ; he studied them , compared them with what he had been taught as a nestling , struggling to bridge between languages , the one he thought with and the one he was learning to think in . The word `` church '' which turned up over and over again among Jubal's words gave him knotty difficulty ; ; there was no Martian concept to match it -- unless one took `` church '' and `` worship '' and `` God '' and `` congregation '' and many other words and equated them to the totality of the only world he had known during growing-waiting then forced the concept back into English in that phrase which had been rejected ( by each differently ) by Jubal , by Mahmoud , by Digby . `` Thou art God '' . He was closer to understanding it in English now , although it could never have the inevitability of the Martian concept it stood for . In his mind he spoke simultaneously the English sentence and the Martian word and felt closer grokking . Repeating it like a student telling himself that the jewel is in the lotus he sank into nirvana . Before midnight he speeded his heart , resumed normal breathing , ran down his check list , uncurled and sat up . He had been weary ; ; now he felt light and gay and clear-headed , ready for the many actions he saw spreading out before him . He felt a puppyish need for company as strong as his earlier necessity for quiet . He stepped out into the hall , was delighted to encounter a water brother . `` Hi '' ! ! `` Oh . Hello , Mike . My , you look chipper '' . `` I feel fine ! ! Where is everybody '' ? ? `` Asleep . Ben and Stinky went home an hour ago and people started going to bed '' . `` Oh '' . Mike felt disappointed that Mahmoud had left ; ; he wanted to explain his new grokking . `` I ought to be asleep , too , but I felt like a snack . Are you hungry '' ? ? `` Sure , I'm hungry '' ! ! `` Come on , there's some cold chicken and we'll see what else '' . They went downstairs , loaded a tray lavishly . `` Let's take it outside . It's plenty warm '' . `` A fine idea '' , Mike agreed . `` Warm enough to swim -- real Indian summer . I'll switch on the floods '' . `` Don't bother '' , Mike answered . `` I'll carry the tray '' . He could see in almost total darkness . Jubal said that his night-sight probably came from the conditions in which he had grown up , and Mike grokked this was true but grokked that there was more to it ; ; his foster parents had taught him to see . As for the night being warm , he would have been comfortable naked on Mount Everest but his water brothers had little tolerance for changes in temperature and pressure ; ; he was considerate of their weakness , once he learned of it . But he was looking forward to snow -- seeing for himself that each tiny crystal of the water of life was a unique individual , as he had read -- walking barefoot , rolling in it . In the meantime he was pleased with the warm night and the still more pleasing company of his water brother . `` Okay , take the tray . I'll switch on the underwater lights . That'll be plenty to eat by '' . `` Fine '' . Mike liked having light up through the ripples ; ; it was a goodness , beauty . They picnicked by the pool , then lay back on the grass and looked at stars . `` Mike , there's Mars . It is Mars , isn't it ? ? Or Antares '' ? ? `` It is Mars '' . `` Mike ? ? What are they doing on Mars '' ? ? He hesitated ; ; the question was too wide for the sparse English language . `` On the side toward the horizon -- the southern hemisphere -- it is spring ; ; plants are being taught to grow '' . `` ' Taught to grow ' '' ? ? He hesitated . `` Larry teaches plants to grow . I have helped him . But my people -- Martians , I mean ; ; I now grok you are my people -- teach plants another way . In the other hemisphere it is growing colder and nymphs , those who stayed alive through the summer , are being brought into nests for quickening and more growing '' . He thought . `` Of the humans we left at the equator , one has discorporated and the others are sad '' . Yes , I heard it in the news '' . Mike had not heard it ; ; he had not known it until asked . `` They should not be sad . Mr. Booker T. W. Jones Food Technician First Class is not sad ; ; the Old Ones have cherished him '' . `` You knew him '' ? ? `` Yes . He had his own face , dark and beautiful . But he was homesick '' . `` Oh , dear ! ! Mike do you ever get homesick ? ? For Mars '' ? ? `` At first I was homesick '' , he answered . `` I was lonely always '' . He rolled toward her and took her in his arms . `` But now I am not lonely . I grok I shall never be lonely again '' . `` Mike darling '' -- They kissed , and went on kissing . Presently his water brother said breathlessly . `` Oh , my ! ! That was almost worse than the first time '' . `` You are all right , my brother '' ? ? `` Yes . Yes indeed . Kiss me again '' . A long time later , by cosmic clock , she said , `` Mike ? ? Is that -- I mean , ' Do you know ' '' -- `` I know . It is for growing closer . Now we grow closer '' . `` Well I've been ready a long time -- goodness , we all have , but never mind , dear ; ; turn just a little . I'll help '' . As they merged , grokking together , Mike said softly and triumphantly : `` Thou art God '' . Her answer was not in words . Then , as their grokking made them ever closer and Mike felt himself almost ready to discorporate her voice called him back : `` Oh ! ! Oh ! ! Thou art God '' ! ! `` We grok God '' . 25 . On Mars humans were building pressure domes for the male and female party that would arrive by next ship . This went faster than scheduled as the Martians were helpful . Part of the time saved was spent on a preliminary estimate for a long-distance plan to free bound oxygen in the sands of Mars to make the planet more friendly to future human generations . The Old Ones neither helped nor hindered this plan ; ; time was not yet . Their meditations were approaching a violent cusp that would shape Martian art for many millennia . On Earth elections continued and a very advanced poet published a limited edition of verse consisting entirely of punctuation marks and spaces ; ; Time magazine reviewed it and suggested that the Federation Assembly Daily Record should be translated into the medium . A colossal campaign opened to sell more sexual organs of plants and Mrs. Joseph ( `` Shadow of Greatness '' ) Douglas was quoted as saying : `` I would no more sit down without flowers on my table than without serviettes '' . A Tibetan swami from Palermo , Sicily , announced in Beverly Hills a newly discovered , ancient yoga discipline for ripple breathing which increased both pranha and cosmic attraction between sexes . His chelas were required to assume the matsyendra posture dressed in hand-woven diapers while he read aloud from Rig-Veda and an assistant guru examined their purses in another room -- nothing was stolen ; ; the purpose was less immediate . The President of the United States proclaimed the first Sunday in November as `` National Grandmothers' Day '' and urged America to say it with flowers . A funeral parlor chain was indicted for price-cutting . Fosterite bishops , after secret conclave , announced the Church's second Major Miracle : Supreme Bishop Digby had been translated bodily to Heaven and spot-promoted to Archangel , ranking with-but-after Archangel Foster . The glorious news had been held up pending Heavenly confirmation of the elevation of a new Supreme Bishop , Huey Short -- a candidate accepted by the Boone faction after lots had been cast repeatedly . L'Unita and Hoy published identical denunciations of Short's elevation , l'Osservatore Romano and the Christian Science Monitor ignored it , Times of India snickered at it , and the Manchester Guardian simply reported it -- the Fosterites in England were few but extremely militant . Digby was not pleased with his promotion . The Man from Mars had interrupted him with his work half finished -- and that stupid jackass Short was certain to louse it up . Foster listened with angelic patience until Digby ran down , then said , `` Listen , junior , you're an angel now -- so forget it . Eternity is no time for recriminations . You too were a stupid jackass until you poisoned me . Afterwards you did well enough . Now that Short is Supreme Bishop he'll do all right , he can't help it . Same as with the Popes . Some of them were warts until they got promoted . Check with one of them , go ahead -- there's no professional jealousy here '' . Digby calmed down , but made one request . Foster shook his halo . `` You can't touch him . You shouldn't have tried to . Oh , you can submit a requisition for a miracle if you want to make a fool of yourself . But , I'm telling you , it'll be turned down -- you don't understand the System yet . The Martians have their own setup , different from ours , and as long as they need him , we can't touch him . They run their show their way -- the Universe has variety , something for everybody -- a fact you field workers often miss '' . `` You mean this punk can brush me aside and I've got to hold still for it '' ? ? `` I held still for the same thing , didn't I ? ? I'm helping you now , am I not ? ? Now look , there's work to be done and lots of it . The Boss wants performance , not gripes . If you need a Day off to calm down , duck over to the Muslim Paradise and take it . Otherwise , straighten your halo , square your wings , and dig in . The sooner you act like an angel the quicker you'll feel angelic . Get Happy , junior '' ! ! Digby heaved a deep ethereal sigh . `` Okay , I'm Happy . Where do I start '' ? ? Jubal did not hear of Digby's disappearance when it was announced , and , when he did , while he had a fleeting suspicion , he dismissed it ; ; if Mike had had a finger in it , he had gotten away with it -- and what happened to supreme bishops worried Jubal not at all as long as he wasn't bothered . His household had gone through an upset . Jubal deduced what had happened but did not know with whom -- and didn't want to inquire . Mike was of legal age and presumed able to defend himself in the clinches . Anyhow , it was high time the boy was salted . Jubal couldn't reconstruct the crime from the way the girls behaved because patterns kept shifting -- ABC vs D , then BCD vs A or AB vs CD , or AD vs CB , through all ways that four women can gang up on each other . This continued most of the week following that ill-starred trip to church , during which period Mike stayed in his room and usually in a trance so deep that Jubal would have pronounced him dead had he not seen it before . Jubal would not have minded it if service had not gone to pieces . The girls seemed to spend half their time tiptoeing in `` to see if Mike was all right '' and they were too preoccupied to cook , much less be secretaries . Even rock-steady Anne -- Hell , Anne was the worst ! ! Absent-minded , subject to unexplained tears Jubal would have bet his life that if Anne were to witness the Second Coming , she would memorize date , time , personae , events , and barometric pressure without batting her calm blue eyes . The expense and time involved are astronomical . However , we sent a third vessel out , a much smaller and faster one than the first two . We have learned much about interstellar drives since a hundred years ago ; ; that is all I can tell you about them . `` But the third ship came back several years ago and reported '' `` That it had found a planet on which human beings could live and which was already inhabited by sentient beings '' ! ! Said Hal , forgetting in his enthusiasm that he had not been asked to speak . Macneff stopped pacing to stare at Hal with his pale blue eyes . `` How did you know '' ? ? He said sharply . `` Forgive me , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But it was inevitable ! ! Did not the Forerunner predict in his Time and the World Line that such a planet would be found ? ? I believe it was on page 573 '' ! ! Macneff smiled and said , `` I am glad that your scriptural lessons have left such an impression '' . How could they not ? ? Thought Hal . Besides , they were not the only impressions . I still bear scars on my back where Pornsen , my gapt , whipped me because I had not learned my lessons well enough . He was a good impresser , that Pornsen . Was ? ? Is ! ! As I grew older and was promoted , so was he , always where I was . He was my gapt in the creche . He was the dormitory gapt when I went to college and thought I was getting away from him . He is now my block gapt . He is the one responsible for my getting such low M. R.'s . Swiftly , came the revulsion , the protest . No , not he , for I , and I alone , am responsible for whatever happens to me . If I get a low M. R. , I do so because I want it that way or my dark self does . If I die , I die because I willed it so . So , forgive me , Sigmen , for the contrary-to-reality thoughts ! ! `` Please pardon me again , Sandalphon '' , said Hal . `` But did the expedition find any records of the Forerunner having been on this planet ? ? Perhaps , even , though this is too much to wish , find the Forerunner himself '' ? ? `` No '' , said Macneff . `` Though that does not mean that there may not be such records there . The expedition was under orders to make a swift survey of conditions and then to return to Earth . I can't tell you now the distance in lightyears or what star this was , though you can see it with the naked eye at night in this hemisphere . If you volunteer , you will be told where you're going after the ship leaves . And it leaves very soon '' . `` You need a linguist '' ? ? Said Hal . `` The ship is huge '' , said Macneff , `` but the number of military men and specialists we are taking limits the linguists to one . We have considered several of your professionals because they were lamechians and above suspicion . Unfortunately '' Hal waited : Macneff paced some more , frowning . Then , he said , `` Unfortunately , only one lamechian linguist exists , and he is too old for this expedition . Therefore '' `` A thousand pardons '' , said Hal . `` But I have just thought of one thing . I am married '' . `` No problem at all '' , said Macneff . `` There will be no women aboard the Gabriel . And , if a man is married , he will automatically be given a divorce '' . Hal gasped , and he said , `` A divorce '' ? ? Macneff raised his hands apologetically and said , `` You are horrified , of course . But , from our reading of the Western Talmud , we Urielites believe that the Forerunner , knowing this situation would arise , made reference to and provision for divorce . It's inevitable in this case , for the couple will be separated for , at the least , forty years . Naturally , he couched the provision in obscure language . In his great and glorious wisdom , he knew that our enemies the Israelites must not be able to read therein what we planned '' . `` I volunteer '' , said Hal . `` Tell me more , Sandalphon '' . Six months later , Hal Yarrow stood in the observation dome of the Gabriel and watched the ball of Earth dwindle above him . It was night on this hemisphere , but the light blazed from the megalopolises of Australia , Japan , China , Southeast Asia , India , Siberia . Hal , the linguist , saw the glittering discs and necklaces in terms of the languages spoken therein . Australia , the Philippine Islands , Japan , and northern China were inhabited by those members of the Haijac Union that spoke American . Southern China , all of southeast Asia , southern India and Ceylon , these states of the Malay Federation spoke Bazaar . Siberia spoke Icelandic . His mind turned the globe swiftly for him , and he visualized Africa , which used Swahili south of the Sahara Sea . All around the Mediterranean Sea , Asia Minor , northern India , and Tibet , Hebrew was the native tongue . In southern Europe , between the Israeli Republics and the Icelandic-speaking peoples of northern Europe , was a thin but long stretch of territory called March . This was no man's land , disputed by the Haijac Union and the Israeli Republic , a potential source of war for the last two hundred years . Neither nation would give up their claim on it , yet neither wished to make any move that might lead to a second Apocalyptic War . So , for all practical purposes , it was an independent nation and by now had its own organized government ( unrecognized outside its own borders ) . Its citizens spoke all of the world's surviving tongues , plus a new one called Lingo , a pidgin whose vocabulary was derived from the other six and whose syntax was so simple it could be contained on half a sheet of paper . Hal saw in his mind the rest of Earth : Iceland , Greenland , the Caribbean Islands , and the eastern half of South America . Here the peoples spoke the tongue of Iceland because that island had gotten the jump on the Hawaiian-Americans who were busy resettling North America and the western half of South America after the Apocalyptic War . Then there was North America , where American was the native speech of all except the twenty descendants of French-Canadians living on the Hudson Bay Preserve . Hal knew that when that side of Earth rotated into the night zone , Sigmen City would blaze out into space . And , somewhere in that enormous light , was his apartment . But Mary would soon no longer be living there , for she would be notified in a few days that her husband had died in an accident while on a flight to Tahiti . She would weep in private , he was sure , for she loved him in her frigid way , though in public she would be dry-eyed . Her friends and professional associates would sympathize with her , not because she had lost a beloved husband , but because she had been married to a man who thought unrealistically . If Hal Yarrow had been killed in a crash , he must have wanted it that way . There was no such thing as an `` accident '' . Somehow , all the other passengers ( also supposed to have died in this web of elaborate frauds to cover up the disappearance of the personnel of the Gabriel ) had simultaneously `` agreed '' to die . And , therefore , being in disgrace , they would not be cremated and their ashes flung to the winds in public ceremony . No , the fish could eat their bodies for all the Sturch cared . Hal felt sorry for Mary ; ; he had a time keeping the tears from welling to his own eyes as he stood in the crowd in the observation dome . Yet , he told himself , this was the best way . He and Mary would no longer have to tear and rend at each other ; ; their mutual torture would be over . Mary was free to marry again , not knowing that the Sturch had secretly given her a divorce , thinking that death had dissolved her marriage . She would have a year in which to make up her mind , to choose a mate from a list selected by her gapt . Perhaps , the psychological barriers that had prevented her from conceiving Hal's child would no longer be present . Perhaps . Hal doubted if this happy event would occur . Mary was as frozen below the navel as he . No matter who the candidate for marriage selected by the gapt The gapt . Pornsen . He would no longer have to see that fat face , hear that whining voice `` Hal Yarrow '' ! ! Said the whining voice . And , slowly , feeling himself icy yet burning , Hal turned . There was the squat loose-jowled man , smiling lopsidedly up at him . `` My beloved ward , my perennial gadfly '' , said the whining voice . `` I had no idea that you , too , would be on this glorious voyage . But I might have known ! ! We seem to be bound by love ; ; Sigmen himself must have foreseen it . Love to you , my ward '' . `` Sigmen love you , too , my guardian '' , said Hal , choking . `` How wonderful to see your cherished self . I had thought we would never again speak to each other '' . 5 the Gabriel pointed towards her destination and , under one-gee acceleration , began to build up towards her ultimate velocity , 99.1 percent of the speed of light . Meanwhile , all the personnel except those few needed to carry out the performance of the ship , went into the suspensor . Here they would lie in suspended animation for many years . Some time later , after a check had been made of all automatic equipment , the crew would join the others . They would sleep while the Gabriel's drive would increase the acceleration to a point which the unfrozen bodies of the personnel could not have endured . Upon reaching the desired speed , the automatic equipment would cut off the drive , and the silent but not empty vessel would hurl towards the star which was its journey's end . Many years later , the photon-counting apparatus in the nose of the ship would determine that the star was close enough to actuate deceleration . Again , a force too strong for unfrozen bodies to endure would be applied . Then , after slowing the vessel considerably , the drive would adjust to a one-gee deceleration . And the crew would be automatically brought out of their suspended animation . These members would then unthaw the rest of the personnel . And , in the half-year left before reaching their destination , the men would carry out whatever preparations were needed . Hal Yarrow was among the last to go into the suspensor and among the first to come out . He had to study the recordings of the language of the chief nation of Ozagen , Siddo . And , from the first , he faced a difficult task . The expedition that had discovered Ozagen had succeeded in correlating two thousand Siddo words with an equal number of American words . The description of the Siddo syntax was very restricted . And , as Hal found out , obviously mistaken in many cases . This discovery caused Hal anxiety . His duty was to write a school text and to teach the entire personnel of the Gabriel how to speak Ozagen . Yet , if he used all of the little means at his disposal , he would be instructing his students wrongly . Moreover , even getting this across would be difficult . For one thing , the organs of speech of the Ozagen natives differed somewhat from Earthmen's ; ; the sounds made by these organs were , therefore , dissimilar . It was true that they could be approximated , but would the Ozagenians understand these approximations ? ? Another obstacle was the grammatical construction of Siddo . Consider the tense system . Instead of inflecting a verb or using an unattached particle to indicate the past or future , Siddo used an entirely different word . Thus , the masculine animate infinitive dabhumaksanigalu'ahai , meaning to live , was , in the perfect tense , ksu'u'peli'afo , and , in the future , mai'teipa . The same use of an entirely different word applied for all the other tenses . Plus the fact that Siddo not only had the normal ( to Earthmen ) three genders of masculine , feminine , and neuter , but the two extra of inanimate and spiritual . Fortunately , gender was inflected , though the expression of it would be difficult for anybody not born in Siddo . The system of indicating gender varied according to tense . All the other parts of speech : nouns , pronouns , adjectives , adverbs , and conjunctions operated under the same system as the verbs . This was not , for the Angel , just a matter of running through a logical or deductive chain , or deciding on some action from some already established premise . No doubt the Angels could do that kind of thing as fast as any computer . What Gabriel was being asked to do now , however , was to re-examine all his basic assumptions , make value-judgments on them , and give them new and different powers in his mind to govern his motives . This is not wholly a reasoning process -- a computer cannot do it all -- and even in an Angel it takes time . ( Or , perhaps , especially in an Angel , whose assumptions had mostly been fixed millions of years ago . ) Being reasonably sure of the reason for the long pause , however , did not make it seem any less long to Jack . He had already become used to Hesperus' snapping back answers to questions almost before Jack could get them asked . There was nothing he could do but wait . The dice were cast . At last Gabriel spoke . `` We misjudged you '' , he said slowly . `` We had concluded that no race as ephemeral as yours could have had time to develop a sense of justice . Of course we have before us the example of the great races at the galactic center ; ; individually they are nearly as mortal as you -- the difference does not seem very marked to us , where it exists . But they have survived for long periods as races , whereas you are young . We shall recommend to them that they shorten your trial period by half . `` For now , it is clear that we were in the wrong . You may reclaim your property , and the penalty on Hesperus is lifted . Hesperus , you may speak '' . `` I did not perceive this essential distinction either , First-Born '' , Hesperus said at once , `` I was only practicing a concept that Jack taught me , called a deal '' . `` Nevertheless , you were its agent . Jack , what is the nature of this concept '' ? ? `` It's a kind of agreement in which each party gives something to the other '' , Jack said . `` We regard it as fair only when each party feels that what he has received is as valuable , or more valuable , than what he has given '' . His heart , he discovered , was pounding . `` For instance , Hesperus agreed to help me find my property , and I agreed to take him to Earth . Between individuals , this process is called bargaining . When it is done between races or nations , it is called making a treaty . And the major part of my mission to your nest is to make a treaty between your race and mine . Recovering the property was much less important '' . `` Strange '' , Gabriel said . `` And apparently impossible . Though it might be that we would have much to give you , you have nothing to give us '' . `` Hesperus and Lucifer '' , Jack said , `` show that we do '' . Another pause ; ; but this one was not nearly as long . `` Then it is a matter of pleasure ; ; of curiosity ; ; of a more alive time . Yes , those could be commodities under this concept . But you should understand , Jack , that Hesperus and Lucifer are not long out of the nursery . Visiting the Earth would not be an offering of worth to those of us who are older '' . This explained a great deal . `` All the more reason , then '' , Jack said , `` why we must have a treaty . We will gladly entertain your young and give them proper living quarters , in return for their help in running our fusion reactors . But we must know if this is in accordance with your customs , and must have your agreement they will not misuse the power we put in their hands , to our hurt '' . `` But this simply requires that they behave in accordance with the dictates of their own natures , and respect yours in turn . To this we of course agree '' . Jack felt a wave of complete elation , but in a second it had vanished without a trace . What Gabriel was asking was that mankind forego all its parochial moral judgments , and contract to let the Angels serve on Earth as it is in Heaven regardless of the applicable Earth laws . The Angels in turn would exercise similar restraints in respect for the natural preferences and natures of the Earthmen -- but they had no faintest notion of man's perverse habit of passing and enforcing laws which were contrary to his own preferences and violations of his nature . The simple treaty principle that Gabriel was asking him to ratify , in short , was nothing less than total trust . Nothing less would serve . And it might be , considering the uncomfortable custom the Angels had of thinking of everything in terms of absolutes , that the proposal of anything less might well amount instead to something like a declaration of war . Furthermore , even the highly trained law clerk who was a part of Jack's total make-up could not understand how the principle could ever be codified . Almost the whole experience of mankind pointed toward suspicion , not trust , as the safest and sanest attitude toward all outsiders . Yet there was some precedent for it . The history of disarmament agreements , for instance , had been unreassuringly dismal ; ; but the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics nevertheless did eventually agree on an atomic bomb test ban , and a sort of provisional acceptance of each other's good intentions on this limited question . Out of that agreement , though not by any easy road , eventually emerged the present world hegemony of the United Nations ; ; suspicion between member states still existed , but it was of about the same low order of virulence as the twentieth-century rivalry between Arizona and California over water supplies . Besides , agreements `` in principle '' , with the petty details to be thrashed out later , were commonplace in diplomatic history . The trouble with them was that they almost never worked , and in fact an agreement `` in principle '' historically turned out to be a sure sign that neither party really wanted the quarrel settled . Suppose that this one were to work ? ? There was no question in Jack's mind of the good faith on one side , at least . If mankind could be convinced of that It was worth trying . In fact , it had to be tried . It would be at once the most tentative and most final treaty that Earth had ever signed . Secretary Hart had taught Jack , at least partially , to be content with small beginnings in all diplomatic matters ; ; but there was no small way to handle this one . He turned back to the screens , the crucial , conclusive phrase on his lips . But he was too late . He had lost his audience . For a moment he could make no sense at all of what he saw . It seemed to be only a riot of color , light and meaningless activity . Gradually , he realized that the pentagon of Angel elders had vanished , and that the ritual learning dance of the nursery had been broken up . The Angels in the nursery were zigzagging wildly in all directions , seemingly at random . `` Hesperus ! ! What's going on here ? ? What's happened '' ? ? `` Your brothers have been found . They are on their way here '' . `` Where ? ? I don't see them . The instruments don't show them '' . `` You can't see them yet , Jack . They'll be in range in a short while '' . Jack scanned the skies , the boards , and the skies again . Nothing . No -- there was a tiny pip on the radar ; ; and it was getting bigger rapidly . If that was the skiff , it was making unprecedented speed . Then the skiff hove into sight , just a dot of light at first against the roiling blackness and crimson streaks of the Coal Sack . Through the telescope , Jack could see that both spacesuits were still attached to it . The sail was still unfurled , though there were a good many holes in it , as Langer had predicted would be the case by now . It was a startling , almost numenous sight ; ; but even more awesome was the fact that it was trailing an enormous comet's-tail of Angels . The skiff was not heading for the nursery , however . It seemed unlikely that her crew , if either of them were alive , could even see the Ariadne , for they were passing her at a distance of nearly a light-year . And there would be no chance of signaling them -- without the Nernst generator Jack could not send a call powerful enough to get through all the static , and by the time he could rebuild his fusion power the skiff would be gone . Fuming , helpless , he watched them pass him . The sail , ragged though it was , still had enough surface to catch some of the ocean of power being poured out from the nursery stars . He would never have believed , without seeing it , that the bizarre little vessel could go so fast . But where was it going ? ? And why was it causing so much agitation among the Angels , and being followed by so many of them ? ? There was only one possible answer , but Jack's horrified mind refused to believe it until he had fed the radar plots of the skiff's course into the computer . The curve on the card the computer spat back at him couldn't be argued with , however . The skiff was headed for the very center of the nebula -- toward that place which , Jack knew now , could hold nothing less important than the very core of the Angel's life and religion . It was clear that Langer had at last found a way to attract the Angel's attention . It was equally clear that as of this moment , the treaty was off . Stern chase 10 Langer would have to be headed off , whether he knew where he was going or not . Almost surely he did ; ; after all , he had had the same set of facts as Jack had had to work from , and he was an almost frighteningly observant man . But not having talked to the Angels , he had made a wrong turn in his reasoning somewhere along the line . Had he decided , perhaps , that the center of the cloud was a center of government , instead of a center of life and faith '' ? ? But it didn't matter now whether he meant to invade the Holy of Holies , or was simply headed in that direction by accident . If it was intentional , it was now also unnecessary ; ; and whether intentional or not , the outcome would be disastrous . Jack crawled under the boards and restored the six feet of lead line he had excised from the Nernst generator switch . When he was back on his feet again and about to reinstall the fuses , however , he hesitated . He had to have fusion power to catch up with the skiff , and he had to have it fast . But fusion power in the Coal Sack was what had triggered all the trouble in the first place -- and he already had an Angel aboard . `` Hesperus '' ? ? `` Receiving '' . `` I'm going to turn my generator back on , as I promised to do . But I can't take you to Earth yet . First I've got to intercept my brothers before they get any deeper into trouble . Will you obstruct this , or will you help ? ? I know it's not part of the bargain , and your elders might not like it '' . `` Nobody else can live in your hearth while I am in it '' , Hesperus said promptly . `` As for my elders , they have already admitted that they were wrong . If because of this incident they become angry with Earth , I will not be permitted to go there at all . Therefore of course I will help '' . With a short-lived sigh of relief , Jack plugged the fuses back in and threw the switch . Without an instant's transition , the green light that meant full fusion power winked on the board . Always before , it had taken five minutes to -- Of course . Hesperus was in there . From here on out , the Ariadne was going to be hotter than any space cruiser man had ever dreamed of . But since he had failed to anticipate it , he lost the five minutes anyhow , in plotting an intercept orbit . `` Hesperus , don't use this t-tau vector trick of yours , please . Ryan hefted his bulk up and supported it on one elbow . He rubbed his eyes sleepily with one huge paw . `` Ekstrohm , Nogol , you guys okay '' ? ? `` Nothing wrong with me that couldn't be cured '' , Nogol said . He didn't say what would cure him ; ; he had been explaining all during the trip what he needed to make him feel like himself . His small black eyes darted inside the olive oval of his face . `` Ekstrohm '' ? ? Ryan insisted . `` Okay '' . `` Well , let's take a ground-level look at the country around here '' . The facsiport rolled open on the landscape . A range of bluffs hugged the horizon , the color of decaying moss . Above them , the sky was the black of space , or the almost equal black of the winter sky above Minneapolis , seen against neon-lit snow . That cold , empty sky was full of fire and light . It seemed almost a magnification of the Galaxy itself , of the Milky Way , blown up by some master photographer . This fiery swath was actually only a belt of minor planets , almost like the asteroid belt in the original Solar System . These planets were much bigger , nearly all capable of holding an atmosphere . But to the infuriation of scientists , for no known reason not all of them did . This would be the fifth mapping expedition to the planetoids of Yancy-6 in three generations . They lay months away from the nearest Earth star by jump drive , and no one knew what they were good for , although it was felt that they would probably be good for something if it could only be discovered -- much like the continent of Antarctica in ancient history . `` How can a planet with so many neighbors be so lonely '' ? ? Ryan asked . He was the captain , so he could ask questions like that . `` Some can be lonely in a crowd '' , Nogol said elaborately . `` What will we need outside , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm asked . `` No helmets '' , the captain answered . `` We can breathe out there , all right . It just won't be easy . This old world lost all of its helium and trace gases long ago . Nitrogen and oxygen are about it '' . `` Ryan , look over there '' , Nogol said . `` Animals . Ringing the ship . Think they're intelligent , maybe hostile '' ? ? `` I think they're dead '' , Ekstrohm interjected quietly . `` I get no readings from them at all . Sonic , electronic , galvanic -- all blank . According to these needles , they're stone dead '' . `` Ekstrohm , you and I will have a look '' , Ryan said . `` You hold down the fort , Nogol . Take it easy '' . `` Easy '' , Nogol confirmed . `` I heard a story once about a rookie who got excited when the captain stepped outside and he couldn't get an encephalographic reading on him . Me , I know the mind of an officer works in a strange and unfathomable manner '' . `` I'm not worried about you mis-reading the dials , Nogol , just about a lug like you reading them at all . Remember , when the little hand is straight up that's negative . Positive results start when it goes towards the hand you use to make your mark '' . `` But I'm ambidextrous '' . Ryan told him what he could do then . Ekstrohm smiled , and followed the captain through the airlock with only a glance at the lapel gauge on his coverall . The strong negative field his suit set up would help to repel bacteria and insects . Actually , the types of infection that could attack a warm-blooded mammal were not infinite , and over the course of the last few hundred years adequate defenses had been found for all basic categories . He wasn't likely to come down with hot chills and puzzling striped fever . They ignored the ladder down to the planet surface and , with only a glance at the seismological gauge to judge surface resistance , dropped to the ground . It was day , but in the thin atmosphere contrasts were sharp between light and shadow . They walked from midnight to noon , noon to midnight , and came to the beast sprawled on its side . Ekstrohm nudged it with a boot . `` Hey , this is pretty close to a wart-hog '' . `` Uh-huh '' , Ryan admitted . `` One of the best matches I've ever found . Well , it has to happen . Statistical average and all . Still , it sometimes gives you a creepy feeling to find a rabbit or a snapping turtle on some strange world . It makes you wonder if this exploration business isn't all some big joke , and somebody has been everywhere before you even started '' . The surveyor looked sidewise at the captain . The big man seldom gave out with such thoughts . Ekstrohm cleared his throat . `` What shall we do with this one ? ? Dissect it '' ? ? Ryan nudged it with his toe , following Ekstrohm's example . `` I don't know , Stormy . It sure as hell doesn't look like any dominant intelligent species to me . No hands , for one thing . Of course , that's not definite proof '' . `` No , it isn't '' , Ekstrohm said . `` I think we'd better let it lay until we get a clearer picture of the ecological setup around here . In the meantime , we might be thinking on the problem all these dead beasts represent . What killed them '' ? ? `` It looks like we did , when we made blastdown '' . `` But what about our landing was lethal to the creatures '' ? ? `` Radiation '' ? ? Ekstrohm suggested . `` The planet is very low in radiation from mineral deposits , and the atmosphere seems to shield out most of the solar output . Any little dose of radiation might knock off these critters '' . `` I don't know about that . Maybe it would work the other way . Maybe because they have had virtually no radioactive exposure and don't have any R's stored up , they could take a lot without harm '' . `` Then maybe it was the shockwave we set up . Or maybe it's sheer xenophobia . They curl up and die at the sight of something strange and alien -- like a spaceship '' . `` Maybe '' , the captain admitted . `` At this stage of the game anything could be possible . But there's one possibility I particularly don't like '' . `` And that is '' ? ? `` Suppose it was not us that killed these aliens . Suppose it is something right on the planet , native to it . I just hope it doesn't work on Earthmen too . These critters went real sudden '' . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and thought , the camp is quiet . The Earthmen made camp outside the spaceship . There was no reason to leave the comfortable quarters inside the ship , except that , faced with a possibility of sleeping on solid ground , they simply had to get out . The camp was a cluster of aluminum bubbles , ringed with a spy web to alert the Earthmen to the approach of any being . Each man had a bubble to himself , privacy after the long period of enforced intimacy on board the ship . Ekstrohm lay in his bunk and listened to the sounds of the night on Yancey-6 138 . There was a keening of wind , and a cracking of the frozen ground . Insects there were on the world , but they were frozen solid during the night , only to revive and thaw in the morning sun . The bunk he lay on was much more uncomfortable than the acceleration couches on board . Yet he knew the others were sleeping more soundly , now that they had renewed their contact with the matter that had birthed them to send them riding high vacuum . Ekstrohm was not asleep . Now there could be an end to pretending . He threw off the light blanket and swung his feet off the bunk , to the floor . Ekstrohm stood up . There was no longer any need to hide . But what was there to do ? ? What had changed for him ? ? He no longer had to lie in his bunk all night , his eyes closed , pretending to sleep . In privacy he could walk around , leave the light on , read . It was small comfort for insomnia . Ekstrohm never slept . Some doctors had informed him he was mistaken about this . Actually , they said , he did sleep , but so shortly and fitfully that he forgot . Others admitted he was absolutely correct -- he never slept . His body processes only slowed down enough for him to dispell fatigue poisons . Occasionally he fell into a waking , gritty-eyed stupor ; ; but he never slept . Never at all . Naturally , he couldn't let his shipmates know this . Insomnia would ground him from the Exploration Service , on physiological if not psychological grounds . He had to hide it . Over the years , he had had buddies in space in whom he thought he could confide . The buddies invariably took advantage of him . Since he couldn't sleep anyway , he might as well stand their watches for them or write their reports . Where the hell did he get off threatening to report any laxness on their part to the captain ? ? A man with insomnia had better avoid bad dreams of that kind if he knew what was good for him . Ekstrohm had to hide his secret . In a camp , instead of shipboard , hiding the secret was easier . But the secret itself was just as hard . Ekstrohm picked up a lightweight no-back from the ship's library , a book by Bloch , the famous twentieth century expert on sex . He scanned a few lines on the social repercussions of a celebrated nineteenth century sex murderer , but he couldn't seem to concentrate on the weighty , pontifical , ponderous style . On impulse , he flipped up the heat control on his coverall and slid back the hatch of the bubble . Ekstrohm walked through the alien glass and looked up at the unfamiliar constellations , smelling the frozen sterility of the thin air . Behind him , his mates stirred without waking . Ekstrohm was startled in the morning by a banging on the hatch of his bubble . It took him a few seconds to put his thoughts in order , and then he got up from the bunk where he had been resting , sleeplessly . The angry burnt-red face of Ryan greeted him . `` Okay , Stormy , this isn't the place for fun and games . What did you do with them '' ? ? `` Do with what '' ? ? `` The dead beasties . All the dead animals laying around the ship '' . `` What are you talking about , Ryan ? ? What do you think I did with them '' ? ? `` I don't know . All I know is that they are gone '' . `` Gone '' ? ? Ekstrohm shouldered his way outside and scanned the veldt . There was no ring of animal corpses . Nothing . Nothing but wispy grass whipping in the keen breeze . `` I'll be damned '' , Ekstrohm said . `` You are right now , buddy . ExPe doesn't like anybody mucking up primary evidence '' . `` Where do you get off , Ryan '' ? ? Ekstrohm demanded . `` Why pick me for your patsy ? ? This has got to be some kind of local phenomenon . Why accuse a shipmate of being behind this '' ? ? `` Listen , Ekstrohm , I want to give you the benefit of every doubt . But you aren't exactly the model of a surveyor , you know . You've been riding on a pink ticket for six years , you know that '' . `` No '' , Ekstrohm said , `` No , I didn't know that '' . `` You've been hiding things from me and Nogol every jump we've made with you . Now comes this ! ! It fits the pattern of secrecy and stealth you've been involved in '' . `` What could I do with your lousy dead bodies ? ? What would I want with them '' ? ? `` All I know is that you were outside the bubbles last night , and you were the only sentient being who came in or out of our alarm web . The tapes show that . Now all the bodies are missing , like they got up and walked away '' . It was not a new experience to Ekstrohm . No . Suspicion wasn't new to him at all . `` Ryan , there are other explanations for the disappearance of the bodies . Look for them , will you ? ? I give you my word I'm not trying to pull some stupid kind of joke , or to deliberately foul up the expedition . Take my word , can't you '' ? ? Ryan shook his head . `` I don't think I can . There's still such a thing as mental illness . You may not be responsible '' . Ekstrohm scowled . `` Don't try anything violent , Stormy . I outweigh you fifty pounds and I'm fast for a big man '' . `` I wasn't planning on jumping you . Why do you have to jump me the first time something goes wrong ? ? She lived and was given a name . Helva . For her first three vegetable months she waved her crabbed claws , kicked weakly with her clubbed feet and enjoyed the usual routine of the infant . She was not alone for there were three other such children in the big city's special nursery . Soon they all were removed to Central Laboratory School where their delicate transformation began . One of the babies died in the initial transferral but of Helva's `` class '' , seventeen thrived in the metal shells . Instead of kicking feet , Helva's neural responses started her wheels ; ; instead of grabbing with hands , she manipulated mechanical extensions . As she matured , more and more neural synapses would be adjusted to operate other mechanisms that went into the maintenance and running of a space ship . For Helva was destined to be the `` brain '' half of a scout ship , partnered with a man or a woman , whichever she chose , as the mobile half . She would be among the elite of her kind . Her initial intelligence tests registered above normal and her adaptation index was unusually high . As long as her development within her shell lived up to expectations , and there were no side-effects from the pituitary tinkering , Helva would live a rewarding , rich and unusual life , a far cry from what she would have faced as an ordinary , `` normal '' being . However , no diagram of her brain patterns , no early I.Q. tests recorded certain essential facts about Helva that Central must eventually learn . They would have to bide their official time and see , trusting that the massive doses of shell-psychology would suffice her , too , as the necessary bulwark against her unusual confinement and the pressures of her profession . A ship run by a human brain could not run rogue or insane with the power and resources Central had to build into their scout ships . Brain ships were , of course , long past the experimental stages . Most babes survived the techniques of pituitary manipulation that kept their bodies small , eliminating the necessity of transfers from smaller to larger shells . And very , very few were lost when the final connection was made to the control panels of ship or industrial combine . Shell people resembled mature dwarfs in size whatever their natal deformities were , but the well-oriented brain would not have changed places with the most perfect body in the Universe . So , for happy years , Helva scooted around in her shell with her classmates , playing such games as Stall , Power-Seek , studying her lessons in trajectory , propulsion techniques , computation , logistics , mental hygiene , basic alien psychology , philology , space history , law , traffic , codes : all the et ceteras that eventually became compounded into a reasoning , logical , informed citizen . Not so obvious to her , but of more importance to her teachers , Helva ingested the precepts of her conditioning as easily as she absorbed her nutrient fluid . She would one day be grateful to the patient drone of the sub-conscious-level instruction . Helva's civilization was not without busy , do-good associations , exploring possible inhumanities to terrestrial as well as extraterrestrial citizens . One such group got all incensed over shelled `` children '' when Helva was just turning fourteen . When they were forced to , Central Worlds shrugged its shoulders , arranged a tour of the Laboratory Schools and set the tour off to a big start by showing the members case histories , complete with photographs . Very few committees ever looked past the first few photos . Most of their original objections about `` shells '' were overridden by the relief that these hideous ( to them ) bodies were mercifully concealed . Helva's class was doing Fine Arts , a selective subject in her crowded program . She had activated one of her microscopic tools which she would later use for minute repairs to various parts of her control panel . Her subject was large -- a copy of the Last Supper -- and her canvas , small -- the head of a tiny screw . She had tuned her sight to the proper degree . As she worked she absentmindedly crooned , producing a curious sound . Shell people used their own vocal cords and diaphragms but sound issued through microphones rather than mouths . Helva's hum then had a curious vibrancy , a warm , dulcet quality even in its aimless chromatic wanderings . `` Why , what a lovely voice you have '' , said one of the female visitors . Helva `` looked '' up and caught a fascinating panorama of regular , dirty craters on a flaky pink surface . Her hum became a gurgle of surprise . She instinctively regulated her `` sight '' until the skin lost its cratered look and the pores assumed normal proportions . `` Yes , we have quite a few years of voice training , madam '' , remarked Helva calmly . `` Vocal peculiarities often become excessively irritating during prolonged intra-stellar distances and must be eliminated . I enjoyed my lessons '' . Although this was the first time that Helva had seen unshelled people , she took this experience calmly . Any other reaction would have been reported instantly . `` I meant that you have a nice singing voice dear '' , the lady amended . `` Thank you . Would you like to see my work '' ? ? Helva asked , politely . She instinctively sheered away from personal discussions but she filed the comment away for further meditation . `` Work '' ? ? Asked the lady . `` I am currently reproducing the Last Supper on the head of a screw '' . `` No , I say '' , the lady twittered . Helva turned her vision back to magnification and surveyed her copy critically . `` Of course , some of my color values do not match the old Master's and the perspective is faulty but I believe it to be a fair copy '' . The lady's eyes , unmagnified , bugged out . `` Oh , I forget '' , and Helva's voice was really contrite . If she could have blushed , she would have . `` You people don't have adjustable vision '' . The monitor of this discourse grinned with pride and amusement as Helva's tone indicated pity for the unfortunate . `` Here , this will help '' , suggested Helva , substituting a magnifying device in one extension and holding it over the picture . In a kind of shock , the ladies and gentlemen of the committee bent to observe the incredibly copied and brilliantly executed Last Supper on the head of a screw . `` Well '' , remarked one gentleman who had been forced to accompany his wife , `` the good Lord can eat where angels fear to tread '' . `` Are you referring , sir '' , asked Helva politely , `` to the Dark Age discussions of the number of angels who could stand on the head of a pin '' ? ? `` I had that in mind '' . `` If you substitute ' atom ' for ' angel ' , the problem is not insoluble , given the metallic content of the pin in question '' . `` Which you are programed to compute '' ? ? `` Of course '' . `` Did they remember to program a sense of humor , as well , young lady '' ? ? `` We are directed to develop a sense of proportion , sir , which contributes the same effect '' . The good man chortled appreciatively and decided the trip was worth his time . If the investigation committee spent months digesting the thoughtful food served them at the Laboratory School , they left Helva with a morsel as well . `` Singing '' as applicable to herself required research . She had , of course , been exposed to and enjoyed a music appreciation course which had included the better known classical works such as `` Tristan und Isolde '' , `` Candide '' , `` Oklahoma '' , `` Nozze de Figaro '' , the atomic age singers , Eileen Farrell , Elvis Presley and Geraldine Todd , as well as the curious rhythmic progressions of the Venusians , Capellan visual chromatics and the sonic concerti of the Altairians . But `` singing '' for any shell person posed considerable technical difficulties to be overcome . Shell people were schooled to examine every aspect of a problem or situation before making a prognosis . Balanced properly between optimism and practicality , the nondefeatist attitude of the shell people led them to extricate themselves , their ships and personnel , from bizarre situations . Therefore to Helva , the problem that she couldn't open her mouth to sing , among other restrictions , did not bother her . She would work out a method , by-passing her limitations , whereby she could sing . She approached the problem by investigating the methods of sound reproduction through the centuries , human and instrumental . Her own sound production equipment was essentially more instrumental than vocal . Breath control and the proper enunciation of vowel sounds within the oral cavity appeared to require the most development and practice . Shell people did not , strictly speaking , breathe . For their purposes , oxygen and other gases were not drawn from the surrounding atmosphere through the medium of lungs but sustained artificially by solution in their shells . After experimentation , Helva discovered that she could manipulate her diaphragmic unit to sustain tone . By relaxing the throat muscles and expanding the oral cavity well into the frontal sinuses , she could direct the vowel sounds into the most felicitous position for proper reproduction through her throat microphone . She compared the results with tape recordings of modern singers and was not unpleased although her own tapes had a peculiar quality about them , not at all unharmonious , merely unique . Acquiring a repertoire from the Laboratory library was no problem to one trained to perfect recall . She found herself able to sing any role and any song which struck her fancy . It would not have occurred to her that it was curious for a female to sing bass , baritone , tenor , alto , mezzo , soprano and coloratura as she pleased . It was , to Helva , only a matter of the correct reproduction and diaphragmic control required by the music attempted . If the authorities remarked on her curious avocation , they did so among themselves . Shell people were encouraged to develop a hobby so long as they maintained proficiency in their technical work . On the anniversary of her sixteenth year in her shell , Helva was unconditionally graduated and installed in her ship , the Aj . Her permanent titanium shell was recessed behind an even more indestructible barrier in the central shaft of the scout ship . The neural , audio , visual and sensory connections were made and sealed . Her extendibles were diverted , connected or augmented and the final , delicate-beyond-description brain taps were completed while Helva remained anesthetically unaware of the proceedings . When she awoke , she was the ship . Her brain and intelligence controlled every function from navigation to such loading as a scout ship of her class needed . She could take care of herself and her ambulatory half , in any situation already recorded in the annals of Central Worlds and any situation its most fertile minds could imagine . Her first actual flight , for she and her kind had made mock flights on dummy panels since she was eight , showed her complete mastery of the techniques of her profession . She was ready for her great adventures and the arrival of her mobile partner . There were nine qualified scouts sitting around collecting base pay the day Helva was commissioned . There were several missions which demanded instant attention but Helva had been of interest to several department heads in Central for some time and each man was determined to have her assigned to his section . Consequently no one had remembered to introduce Helva to the prospective partners . The ship always chose its own partner . Had there been another `` brain '' ship at the Base at the moment , Helva would have been guided to make the first move . As it was , while Central wrangled among itself , Robert Tanner sneaked out of the pilots' barracks , out to the field and over to Helva's slim metal hull . `` Hello , anyone at home '' ? ? Tanner wisecracked . `` Of course '' , replied Helva logically , activating her outside scanners . `` Are you my partner '' ? ? She asked hopefully , as she recognized the Scout Service uniform . `` All you have to do is ask '' , he retorted hopefully . `` No one has come . I thought perhaps there were no partners available and I've had no directives from Central '' . Even to herself Helva sounded a little self-pitying but the truth was she was lonely , sitting on the darkened field . Always she had had the company of other shells and more recently , technicians by the score . The sudden solitude had lost its momentary charm and become oppressive . `` No directives from Central is scarcely a cause for regret , but there happen to be eight other guys biting their fingernails to the quick just waiting for an invitation to board you , you beautiful thing '' . It would have killed you in the cabin . Do you have anything for me '' ? ? Mercer stammered , not knowing what B'dikkat meant , and the two-nosed man answered for him , `` I think he has a nice baby head , but it isn't big enough for you to take yet '' . Mercer never noticed the needle touch his arm . B'dikkat had turned to the next knot of people when the super-condamine hit Mercer . He tried to run after B'dikkat , to hug the lead spacesuit , to tell B'dikkat that he loved him . He stumbled and fell , but it did not hurt . The many-bodied girl lay near him . Mercer spoke to her . `` Isn't it wonderful ? ? You're beautiful , beautiful , beautiful . I'm so happy to be here '' . The woman covered with growing hands came and sat beside them . She radiated warmth and good fellowship . Mercer thought that she looked very distinguished and charming . He struggled out of his clothes . It was foolish and snobbish to wear clothing when none of these nice people did . The two women babbled and crooned at him . With one corner of his mind he knew that they were saying nothing , just expressing the euphoria of a drug so powerful that the known universe had forbidden it . With most of his mind he was happy . He wondered how anyone could have the good luck to visit a planet as nice as this . He tried to tell the Lady Da , but the words weren't quite straight . A painful stab hit him in the abdomen . The drug went after the pain and swallowed it . It was like the cap in the hospital , only a thousand times better . The pain was gone , though it had been crippling the first time . He forced himself to be deliberate . He rammed his mind into focus and said to the two ladies who lay pinkly nude beside him in the desert , `` That was a good bite . Maybe I will grow another head . That would make B'dikkat happy '' ! ! The Lady Da forced the foremost of her bodies in an upright position . Said she , `` I'm strong , too . I can talk . Remember , man , remember . People never live forever . We can die , too , we can die like real people . I do so believe in death '' ! ! Mercer smiled at her through his happiness . `` Of course you can . But isn't this nice '' With this he felt his lips thicken and his mind go slack . He was wide awake , but he did not feel like doing anything . In that beautiful place , among all those companionable and attractive people , he sat and smiled . B'dikkat was sterilizing his knives . Mercer wondered how long the super-condamine had lasted him . He endured the ministrations of the dromozoa without screams or movement . The agonies of nerves and itching of skin were phenomena which happened somewhere near him , but meant nothing . He watched his own body with remote , casual interest . The Lady Da and the hand-covered woman stayed near him . After a long time the half-man dragged himself over to the group with his powerful arms . Having arrived he blinked sleepily and friendlily at them , and lapsed back into the restful stupor from which he had emerged . Mercer saw the sun rise on occasion , closed his eyes briefly , and opened them to see stars shining . Time had no meaning . The dromozoa fed him in their mysterious way ; ; the drug canceled out his needs for cycles of the body . At last he noticed a return of the inwardness of pain . The pains themselves had not changed ; ; he had . He knew all the events which could take place on Shayol . He remembered them well from his happy period . Formerly he had noticed them -- now he felt them . He tried to ask the Lady Da how long they had had the drug , and how much longer they would have to wait before they had it again . She smiled at him with benign , remote happiness ; ; apparently her many torsos , stretched out along the ground , had a greater capacity for retaining the drug than did his body . She meant him well , but was in no condition for articulate speech . The half-man lay on the ground , arteries pulsating prettily behind the half-transparent film which protected his abdominal cavity . Mercer squeezed the man's shoulder . The half-man woke , recognized Mercer and gave him a healthily sleepy grin . `` ' A good morrow to you , my boy . That's out of a play . Did you ever see a play '' ? ? `` You mean a game with cards '' ? ? `` No '' , said the half-man , `` a sort of eye-machine with real people doing the figures '' . `` I never saw that '' , said Mercer , `` but I '' -- `` But you want to ask me when B'dikkat is going to come back with the needle '' . `` Yes '' , said Mercer , a little ashamed of his obviousness . `` Soon '' , said the half-man . That's why I think of plays . We all know what is going to happen . We all know when it is going to happen . We all know what the dummies will do '' -- he gestured at the hummocks in which the decorticated men were cradled -- `` and we all know what the new people will ask . But we never know how long a scene is going to take '' . `` What's a ' scene ' '' ? ? Asked Mercer . `` Is that the name for the needle '' ? ? The half-man laughed with something close to real humor . `` No , no , no . You've got the lovelies on the brain . A scene is just a part of a play . I mean we know the order in which things happen , but we have no clocks and nobody cares enough to count days or to make calendars and there's not much climate here , so none of us know how long anything takes . The pain seems short and the pleasure seems long . I'm inclined to think that they are about two Earth-weeks each '' . Mercer did not know what an `` Earth-week '' was , since he had not been a well-read man before his conviction , but he got nothing more from the half-man at that time . The half-man received a dromozootic implant , turned red in the face , shouted senselessly at Mercer , `` Take it out , you fool ! ! Take it out of me '' ! ! When Mercer looked on helplessly , the half-man twisted over on his side , his pink dusty back turned to Mercer , and wept hoarsely and quietly to himself . Mercer himself could not tell how long it was before B'dikkat came back . It might have been several days . It might have been several months . Once again B'dikkat moved among them like a father ; ; once again they clustered like children . This time B'dikkat smiled pleasantly at the little head which had grown out of Mercer's thigh -- a sleeping child's head , covered with light hair on top and with dainty eyebrows over the resting eyes . Mercer got the blissful needle . When B'dikkat cut the head from Mercer's thigh , he felt the knife grinding against the cartilage which held the head to his own body . He saw the child-face grimace as the head was cut ; ; he felt the far , cool flash of unimportant pain , as B'dikkat dabbed the wound with a corrosive antiseptic which stopped all bleeding immediately . The next time it was two legs growing from his chest . Then there had been another head beside his own . Or was that after the torso and legs , waist to toe-tips , of the little girl which had grown from his side ? ? He forgot the order . He did not count time . Lady Da smiled at him often , but there was no love in this place . She had lost the extra torsos . In between teratologies , she was a pretty and shapely woman ; ; but the nicest thing about their relationship was her whisper to him , repeated some thousands of time , repeated with smiles and hope , `` People never live forever '' . She found this immensely comforting , even though Mercer did not make much sense out of it . Thus events occurred , and victims changed in appearance , and new ones arrived . Sometimes B'dikkat took the new ones , resting in the everlasting sleep of their burned-out brains , in a ground-truck to be added to other herds . The bodies in the truck threshed and bawled without human speech when the dromozoa struck them . Finally , Mercer did manage to follow B'dikkat to the door of the cabin . He had to fight the bliss of super-condamine to do it . Only the memory of previous hurt , bewilderment and perplexity made him sure that if he did not ask B'dikkat when he , Mercer , was happy , the answer would no longer be available when he needed it . Fighting pleasure itself , he begged B'dikkat to check the records and to tell him how long he had been there . B'dikkat grudgingly agreed , but he did not come out of the doorway . He spoke through the public address box built into the cabin , and his gigantic voice roared out over the empty plain , so that the pink herd of talking people stirred gently in their happiness and wondered what their friend B'dikkat might be wanting to tell them . When he said it , they thought it exceedingly profound , though none of them understood it , since it was simply the amount of time that Mercer had been on Shayol : `` Standard years -- eighty-four years , seven months , three days , two hours , eleven and one half minutes . Good luck , fellow '' . Mercer turned away . The secret little corner of his mind , which stayed sane through happiness and pain , made him wonder about B'dikkat . What persuaded the cow-man to remain on Shayol ? ? What kept him happy without super-condamine ? ? Was B'dikkat a crazy slave to his own duty or was he a man who had hopes of going back to his own planet some day , surrounded by a family of little cow-people resembling himself ? ? Mercer , despite his happiness , wept a little at the strange fate of B'dikkat . His own fate he accepted . He remembered the last time he had eaten -- actual eggs from an actual pan . The dromozoa kept him alive , but he did not know how they did it . He staggered back to the group . The Lady Da , naked in the dusty plain , waved a hospitable hand and showed that there was a place for him to sit beside her . There were unclaimed square miles of seating space around them , but he appreciated the kindliness of her gesture none the less . 4 , The years , if they were years , went by . The land of Shayol did not change . Sometimes the bubbling sound of geysers came faintly across the plain to the herd of men ; ; those who could talk declared it to be the breathing of Captain Alvarez . There was night and day , but no setting of crops , no change of season , no generations of men . Time stood still for these people , and their load of pleasure was so commingled with the shocks and pains of the dromozoa that the words of the Lady Da took on very remote meaning . `` People never live forever '' . Her statement was a hope , not a truth in which they could believe . They did not have the wit to follow the stars in their courses , to exchange names with each other , to harvest the experience of each for the wisdom of all . There was no dream of escape for these people . Though they saw the old-style chemical rockets lift up from the field beyond B'dikkat's cabin , they did not make plans to hide among the frozen crop of transmuted flesh . Far long ago , some other prisoner than one of these had tried to write a letter . His handwriting was on a rock . Mercer read it , and so had a few of the others , but they could not tell which man had done it . Nor did they care . The letter , scraped on stone , had been a message home . They could still read the opening : `` Once , I was like you , stepping out of my window at the end of day , and letting the winds blow me gently toward the place I lived in . Once , like you , I had one head , two hands , ten fingers on my hands . The front part of my head was called a face , and I could talk with it . Now I can only write , and that only when I get out of pain . Dan Morgan told himself he would forget Ann Turner . He was well rid of her . He certainly didn't want a wife who was fickle as Ann . If he had married her , he'd have been asking for trouble . But all of this was rationalization . Sometimes he woke up in the middle of the night thinking of Ann , and then could not get back to sleep . His plans and dreams had revolved around her so much and for so long that now he felt as if he had nothing . The easiest thing would be to sell out to Al Budd and leave the country , but there was a stubborn streak in him that wouldn't allow it . The best antidote for the bitterness and disappointment that poisoned him was hard work . He found that if he was tired enough at night , he went to sleep simply because he was too exhausted to stay awake . Each day he found himself thinking less often of Ann ; ; each day the hurt was a little duller , a little less poignant . He had plenty of work to do . Because the summer was unusually dry and hot , the spring produced a smaller stream than in ordinary years . The grass in the meadows came fast , now that the warm weather was here . He could not afford to lose a drop of the precious water , so he spent most of his waking hours along the ditches in his meadows . He had no idea how much time Budd would give him . In any case , he had no intention of being caught asleep , so he carried his revolver in its holster on his hip and he took his Winchester with him and leaned it against the fence . He stopped every few minutes and leaned on his shovel as he studied the horizon , but nothing happened , each day dragging out with monotonous calm . When , in late afternoon on the last day in June , he saw two people top the ridge to the south and walk toward the house , he quit work immediately and strode to his rifle . It could be some kind of trick Budd had thought up . No one walked in this country , least of all Ed Dow or Dutch Renfro or any of the rest of the Bar B crew . Morgan watched the two figures for a time , puzzled . When they were closer and he saw that one was a woman , he was more puzzled than ever . He cleaned his shovel , left it against the fence , picked up his Winchester , and started downstream . His visitors had crawled through the south fence and were crossing the meadow , angling toward the house . Now he saw that both the man and woman were moving slowly and irregularly , staggering , as if they found it a struggle to remain on their feet . Reaching the house ahead of them , he waited with his Winchester in his hands . They crawled through the north fence and came on toward him , and now he saw that both were young , not more than nineteen or twenty . They were dirty , their clothes were torn , and the girl was so exhausted that she fell when she was still twenty feet from the front door . She lay there , making no effort to get back on her feet . The boy came on to the porch and sat down , his gaze on Morgan as if half expecting him to shoot and not really caring . Morgan hesitated , thinking that if this was a trick , it was a good one . He didn't think it was possible for this couple to be pretending . The boy licked his dry lips . He asked , `` Could we have a drink '' ? ? Morgan jerked his head toward the front door . `` In the kitchen '' , he said . Leaning his Winchester against the front of the house , he walked to the girl . `` Get up . There's water in the house '' . She didn't move or say anything . Her eyes were glazed as if she didn't hear or even see him . She had reached a point at which she didn't even care how she looked . Her face was very thin , and burned by the sun until much of the skin was dead and peeling , the new skin under it red and angry . Her blond hair was frowzy , her dress torn in several places , and her shoes were so completely worn out that they were practically no protection . It must have hurt her even to walk , for the sole was completely off her left foot and Morgan saw that it was bruised and bleeding . He picked her up , sliding one hand under her shoulders , the other under her knees , and carried her into the house . She was amazingly light , and so relaxed in his arms that he wasn't even sure she was conscious . Any lingering suspicion that this was a trick Al Budd had thought up was dispelled . No girl would go this far to fool a man so she could kill him . Besides , she had a sweet face that attracted him . He put her down on the couch , and going into the kitchen , saw that the boy had dropped into a chair beside the table . They looked a good deal alike , Morgan thought . Both had blonde hair and blue eyes , and there was even a faint similarity of features . Morgan filled the dipper from the water bucket on the shelf , went back into the front room , lifted the girl's head , and held the edge of the dipper to her mouth . She drank greedily , and murmured , `` Thank you '' , as he lowered her head . He stood looking down at her for a moment , wondering what could have reduced her to this condition . He had seen a few nester wagons go through the country , the families almost starving to death , but he had never seen any of them on foot and as bad off as these two . The girl dropped off to sleep . Morgan returned to the kitchen , built a fire , and carried in several buckets of water from the spring which he poured into the copper boiler that he had placed on the stove . He brought his Winchester in from the front of the house , then faced the boy . `` Who are you and what happened to you '' ? ? He asked . `` I'm Billy Jones '' , the boy answered . `` That's my wife Sharon . We ran out of money and we haven't eaten for two days '' . `` What are you doing here '' ? ? `` Are we in Wyoming '' ? ? Morgan nodded . `` About five miles north of the line '' . Jones sighed as if relieved . `` We've been looking for work , but all the ranchers have turned us down '' . `` You mean you dragged your wife all over hell's half-acre looking for work '' ? ? Morgan demanded . `` The town of Buckhorn's only about six miles from here . Why didn't you go there '' ? ? `` We didn't want town work '' , Jones said . `` This is a mighty empty country '' , Morgan said . `` There's only one more ranch three miles north of here . You'd have starved to death if you'd missed both places '' . `` Then we're lucky we got here . Could you give us a job , Mr. '' `` Morgan . Dan Morgan '' . He was silent a moment , thinking he could use a man this time of year , and if the girl could cook , it would give him more time in the meadows , but he knew nothing about the couple . They might kill him in his sleep , thinking there was money in the house . He dismissed the possibility at once . The girl's thin face haunted him . It wasn't the face of a killer . He wasn't so sure about the boy . He hadn't shaved for several weeks , his sparse beard giving his face a pathetic , woebegone expression . There was more to this than Jones had told him . They were running from something . He'd be an idiot to let them stay he thought , but he couldn't send them on , either . `` I could use some help '' , Morgan said finally , `` but I can't afford to pay you anything . I guess you'd better go on in the morning '' . `` We'll work for our keep '' , the boy said eagerly . `` I've been mucking in a mine in the San Juan , but I used to work on a ranch . Sharon , she's cooked in a restaurant . We'll work hard , Mr. Morgan '' . `` I'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Right now you need a meal and a bath . Your wife's in terrible shape '' . `` I know '' , Jones said dejectedly . Morgan filled the fire box with wood again , then started supper and set the table . When the meal was ready , he told Jones to wash up , and going into the front room , woke the girl . He said , `` I've got some supper ready '' . She rubbed her eyes and stretched , then sat up , her hands going to her hair . `` I'm a mess '' , she said , and suddenly she was alarmed . `` Who are you ? ? How did we get here '' ? ? `` I'm Dan Morgan . This is the Rafter Aj . You fell down in front of the house , and I carried you in . I gave you a drink and then you went to sleep '' . `` Oh '' . She stared at him , her eyes wide as she thought about what he had said ; ; then she murmured : `` You're very kind , Mr. Morgan . Do you take in all the strays who come by '' ? ? `` I don't have many strays coming to my front door '' , he said . `` Think you can walk to the table '' ? ? `` Of course '' . She got to her feet , staggered , and almost fell . He caught her by an arm and helped her into the kitchen . She sat down at the table , shaking her head . `` I'm sorry , Mr. Morgan . I'm usually a very strong woman , but I'm awfully tired '' . `` And hungry '' , he said . `` Start in . It's not much of a meal , but it's what I eat '' . `` Not much of a meal '' ? ? The girl cried . `` Mr. Morgan , it's the best-looking food I ever saw '' . He told himself he had never seen two people eat so much . When they were finally satisfied , Jones said , `` I think he's going to give us work '' . The grateful way she looked at Morgan made him ashamed of himself . When he saw the expression in her eyes , he knew he couldn't send them on . She said , `` I guess the Lord looks out for fools , drunkards , and innocents '' . Morgan laughed . `` Which are you '' ? ? `` We're not drunkards '' , she said . `` That's all I'm sure of '' . She helped him with the dishes , then he brought more water in from the spring before it got dark . He carried the tub from the back of the house where it hung from a nail in the wall . He said : `` You'll feel a lot better after you have a bath . Your feet are in bad shape , Mrs. Jones . You'll have to go to town to see the doc '' . `` No , she'll be all right '' , Jones said quickly . `` I mean , we don't have any way to get there and we can't expect you to quit work just to take us to town '' . `` We'll see '' , Morgan said . `` Could you find me a needle and thread '' ? ? The girl asked . `` My dress needs some work on it '' . He nodded and , going into the bedroom , brought a needle , thread , and scissors . He said : `` I'm going to bed '' . He nodded at the door in front of him . `` That's my spare bedroom . The bed isn't made , but you'll find plenty of blankets there '' . `` You're awfully kind '' , the girl said . `` We'll pay you back if you'll let us . Some way '' . `` It's all right '' , he said . `` I get up early . You'd better sleep '' . Jones followed him into the front room , closing the door behind him . He said : `` If it's all right with you , Mr. Morgan , I'll sleep out here on the couch . We haven't slept together since we started . I just can't take any chances on getting her pregnant , and if we were sleeping together '' He stopped , embarrassed , and Morgan said , `` I understand that , but I don't savvy why you'd go off and leave your jobs in the first place '' . `` We got fired '' , Jones said . `` We had to do something '' . They were a pair of lost , whipped kids , Morgan thought as he went to bed . Gavin paused wearily . `` You can't stay here with me . It's late and you said they'd be here by dawn '' . `` You can't make me go '' . Gavin sank down again into his chair and began to rock . He was thinking of Rittenhouse and how he had left him there , to rock to death on the porch of the Splendide . It was the only thing in his life for which he felt guilt . Beneath his black shirt his frail shoulders shook and croaks of pain broke from his throat , the stored pain shattering free in slow gasps , terrible to see . Clayton tried to call back the face of the man he had known . Against that other man he could rally his anger ; ; against this bent man in the chair he was powerless . Gavin's lips moved so that Clayton had to stoop to catch the words . `` Do you remember Big Charlie '' ? ? He whispered . `` He stuck with me all these years . Just a half-breed 'pache , never said much , never meant anythin to me , but he stuck with me . He got into a fight with Tom English , your brother's son . It was a fair fight , the boy provoked it -- Big Charlie told me so . I believed him . They killed Big Charlie , dumped his body in my rose garden two nights ago . My men , they all left me . Just cleared out . I didn't understand why , Clay . They just all cleared out . I treated them fair '' He wiped his lips with a sleeve , then stared at Clayton in a childish kind of wonder . `` Do you mean '' -- he asked almost shyly -- `` you want me to go with you , wherever you're goin '' ? ? `` Yes '' . `` You don't hate me any more '' ? ? Clayton choked , shook his head , murmuring , `` No '' . `` Come here '' . The old man beckoned with one finger and Clayton went forward to him . Gavin slipped his arms around his chest and hugged him fiercely . `` All my life '' , he said , `` I tried . I tried . I saw you driftin away -- but I tried . And you wanted no part of me when I had so much to give . Now there's nothin left of me . Laurel is gone , my men are gone , Ed is dead -- and you come to me , to help me . Oh ! ! God in Heaven , I can't refuse you now . That would mock me too much ! ! Can't let you go way from me again '' He closed his eyes , ashamed of his tears . `` I'll go , Clay '' . Clayton freed himself from the embrace and stepped back . The eyes followed him fearfully . `` The horses . There isn't much time . I'll saddle the horses and bring them round . You get ready '' He burst from the hot confinement of the room into the cold night air . Gavin's stallion was in the barn and he tightened the cinches over the saddle blanket , working by touch in the darkness , comforting the animal with easy words . When he had finished he led him and the mare to the porch . The stallion had smelled the mare coming into heat and began to paw the turf , shaking his head . Clayton looped the reins in a knot over the veranda post and patted the warm flesh of his neck . The mare had backed away . `` You take it easy , boy '' , Clayton whispered . `` She doesn't want you now . You take it easy , your time will come '' . Gavin stood on the porch , a thin figure . He had taken a carbine down from the wall and it trailed from his hand , the stock bumping on the wood floor . Clayton called to him and he came slowly down the steps . `` Clay '' , he said , `` where are we goin '' ? ? `` To a ranch in the valley . There's someone there I have to see . We may take her with us -- to California . I don't know yet , it's crazy ; ; I have to think about it . But California is where we're goin '' . `` California '' . Gavin began to nod . `` That's a new land . A man could make a mark there . Two men , together like us , we could do somethin fine out there , maybe find a place where no one's ever been . Start out fresh , the two of us , like nothin had ever happened '' . `` Yes , like a father and son '' . `` I made you what you are '' , Gavin whispered . `` I made you so you could stand up . I made you a man '' . `` Yes , Gavin , you did '' . He approached the horse and laid a hand on the stallion's quivering neck . `` Help me up , Clay . Help me up , I feel kind of stiff '' . Clayton lifted him gently into the saddle , like a child . `` I hate to leave my garden '' , Gavin said . `` They'll trample it down . I loved my garden '' . `` It will grow again -- in California '' . `` I loved this valley '' , he whispered huskily . `` Lived alone here for three years , before any man came . Lived alone by the river . It was nice then , so peaceful and quiet . There was no one but me . I don't want to leave it '' . Clayton swung into the saddle and whacked the stallion's rump . The two horses broke from the yard , from the circle of light cast by the lamp still burning in the house , into the darkness . Thirty-five they rode at a measured pace through the valley . Dawn would come soon and the night was at its coldest . The moon had sunk below the black crest of the mountains and the land , seen through eyes that had grown accustomed to the absence of light , looked primeval , as if no man had ever trespassed before . It looked as Gavin had first seen it years ago , on those nights when he slept alone by his campfire and waked suddenly to the hoot of an owl or the rustle of a blade of grass in the moon's wind -- a savage land , untenanted and brooding , too strong to be broken by the will of men . Gavin sighed bitterly . In that inert landscape the caravan of his desires passed before his mind . He saw them ambushed , strewn in the postures of the broken and the dying . In vain his mind groped to reassemble the bones of the relationships he had sought so desperately , but they would not come to life . The silence oppressed him , made him bend low over the horse's neck as if to hide from a wind that had begun to blow far away and was twisting slowly through the darkness in its slow search . They passed ranches that were framed dark gray against the black hills . Then at last the darkness began to dissolve . A bold line of violet broke loose from the high ridge of the mountains , followed by feathers of red that swept the last stars from the sky . The wan light spread over the ground and the valley revealed in the first glimmer the contours of trees and fences and palely shadowed gullies . They had been seen as soon as they left the ranch , picked out of the darkness by the weary though watchful eyes of two men posted a few hundred yards away in the windless shelter of the trees . The two men whipped their horses into town and flung themselves up the steps of the saloon , crying their intelligence . The men in Pettigrew's were tired from a night's drinking , their faces red and baggy . But the liquor had flushed their courage . They greeted the news angrily , as though they had been cheated of purpose . Lester heard their muttering , saw their eyes reveal their desire . He worked his tongue round and round in the hollow of his cheek and his voice came out of his throat , dry and cracked . `` He's leavin . That's what you wanted , isn't it ? ? Clayton is with him , takin him out of the valley . You can't '' -- `` Keep out of this '' , Purvis snarled . `` He's not your brother , he's Gavin's son . You see , he lied to us when he said he was leavin alone '' . Joe Purvis was thinking back many years . First he thought of the time he had ridden to Gavin and told him how his cattle were being rustled at the far end of the valley . He remembered Gavin's smirk , his own cringing feeling , his impotence . Then he thought of a time when Clayton's horse had fallen lame in the Gap . His wife had said to him : `` Nellie is in love with Clayton Roy . He wouldn't even dance with her at Gavin's party . He treats her like she was dirt . And you stand by like a fool and let him do it '' He remembered Clayton's mocking smile in the saloon when he had asked him what he would do if they brought their cattle to water . It was the night Clayton had tricked them in the poker game . `` You're Gavin's son '' , Joe Purvis had said . He turned to Lester . `` You brought him back to this valley thinkin he would help you find your boy . He meant to help Gavin all the time . He made a fool of you , Lester '' . He swung round to the other men -- `` We can catch him easy ! ! There are plenty of fresh horses halfway at my place . If we let them go , they won't stay away , they'll find men to ride with them and they'll be back . There's only one way they can get out now and that's through the Gap -- if we ride hard we can take them '' . Lester's hand fluttered to Cabot's shoulder . The boy jerked away . `` He killed Tom -- do you understand that '' ? ? Cabot turned back to the men and he was drunk with the thing they would do , wild to break from the cloying warmth of the saloon into the cold of the ebbing night . He fled through the door and down the steps , running , and the men grunted and followed , pushing Lester to one side where he backed against the wall with the sleeve of his jacket raised before his eyes to shut out the light . Purvis and Silas Pettigrew were the last to leave . They mounted up and rode slowly behind the others at a safe distance . Thirty-six in the cold dawn the mist swirled low to the ground , then rose with a gust of sudden wind to leave the valley clear . The clouds parted and hard gashes of sunlight swooped down to stain the earth with streaks of white and gold light so that the shadows of the running horses flowed like dark streams over the dazzling snow . When they turned in the saddle they could see the men behind them , strung out on the prairie in a flat black line . The wind of their running was cold and wild , the horses were lathered and their manes streamed like stiff black pennants in the wind . The mare began to tire and Clayton felt the spray of snow from the hoofs of Gavin's stallion . He looked over his shoulder at the thin dotting of pursuers . They neither gained nor fell back . He rode low on the mare's neck . Ahead of him Gavin turned slightly off the trail and pointed for the Gap , no more than a mile away . Gavin's face was bloodless with excitement . He did not look back ; ; he could feel more than hear the staccato beat of hoofs that fanned out across the prairie to the north . He knew who was riding after him -- the men he had known all his life , the men who had worked for him , sworn their loyalty to him . Now they were riding to kill him . And he was fleeing , running -- fleeing his death and his life at the same time . The land over which he sped was the land he had created and lived in : his valley . With every leaping stride of the horse beneath him he crossed one more patch of earth that had been his , that he would never see again . The Gap looming before him -- the place where had confronted Jack English on that day so many years ago -- was his exit from all that had meaning to him . California is too far , he thought . He would never reach California . He was too old -- when he passed up and through the corridor of pines that lined the trail he could see ahead , he was passing from life . The sentry was not dead . He was , in fact , showing signs of reviving . He had been carrying an Enfield rifle and a holstered navy cap-and-ball pistol . A bayonet hung in a belt scabbard . He was partially uniformed in a cavalry tunic and hat . Mike stripped these from him and donned them . He and Dean tied and gagged the man , using his belt and shirt for the purpose . They dragged him inside the building . Fiske joined them , unsteady on his feet . Julia , seeing the bandage , rushed to him . `` You are hurt '' ! ! She breathed . `` I never felt better in my life '' , Fiske blustered . He turned to Susan and kissed her on the cheek . `` Thank you , My dear '' , he said . `` You are very brave '' . Mike silenced them . `` We'll talk later . First , we've got to get out of here '' . `` We'll grab horses '' , Dean said . `` The main bunch is outside , but there are some over there inside the wall '' . Mike debated it , trying to decide whether Fiske was strong enough to ride . But it at least offered him a chance for living . He had none here . And , for the sake of Julia and Susan , it had to be tried . The guerrilla bivouac remained silent . Light showed in the orderly room across the parade ground . Someone evidently was on duty there . No doubt there would be men guarding the horses . About a dozen animals were held inside the stockade , as best Mike could make out in the moonlight . Evidently this was a precaution so that mounts would be available in an emergency . He handed the guard's rifle to Fiske . `` Dean and myself will try to cut out horses to ride '' , he said . `` We'll stampede the rest . You stay with the ladies . All of you be ready to ride hell for leather '' . He added , `` If this doesn't work out , the three of you barricade yourself in the house and talk terms with them '' . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . Susan halted Dean and kissed him . She clung to him , talking to him , and dabbing at her eyes . Mike turned away . He was thinking that the way she had responded to his own kiss hadn't meant what he had believed it had . He felt unutterably weary . Dean turned from Susan and took Julia Fortune in his arms . He kissed her also , and with deep tenderness . She too began to weep . He released her and joined Mike . `` All right '' , he said . Mike only said , `` Later '' . `` Be careful , McLish '' ! ! Susan said fiercely . `` The way you were careful '' ? ? He snorted . `` Running around in the moonlight almost naked and slugging a man with a rock '' ? ? He kept going . He wanted no more sentimental scenes with her . He might say or do something foolish . Something all of them would regret . He might tell her how sorry a spectacle she was making of herself , pretending to be blind to the way Julia Fortune had taken Dean's affections from her . And using him , Mike McLish , as a sop to her pride . He handed the bayonet to Dean and kept the pistol . `` Stay well back of me '' , he said . `` I'm going to walk up to the horses , bold as brass , pretending I'm one of the guerrillas . There's bound to be someone on guard , but the hat might fool them long enough for me to get close '' . Holding the pistol concealed , he walked to the rear wall of the stockade . It was pierced by a wagon gate built of two wings . One wing stood open . Mike passed through it and moved toward the dark mass of horses . They were tethered , army style , on stable lines . A voice spoke near-at-hand . `` Who's that '' ? ? Just me '' , Mike said . `` Is that you , Bill '' ? ? He located his man . The guard stood in the shadow of the stockade wall just out of reach of the moonlight . Mike kept walking and got within arm's reach before the man became suspicious and straightened from his lax slouch . Mike struck with the muzzle of the pistol . But the luck that had been running their way left him . The guard instinctively parried the blow with his rifle . He tried to veer the rifle around to fire into Mike's body . Mike , off balance , managed to bat the muzzle away a moment before it exploded . The bullet went wide . Mike swung the pistol in a savage backlash . This time it connected solidly on the man's temple , felling him . The explosion of the rifle had crashed against the walls of the stockade and the deep echoes were still rolling in the hills . The startled horses began rearing on their tethers . Dean came rushing up . `` Are you hit '' ? ? He demanded . `` No , but the fat's in the fire '' ! ! Mike said . `` There's no chance now of all of us getting away . You'll have to try it alone '' . The sentry's saddled horse stood picketed nearby , having been kept handy in case of need . Mike took the bayonet from Dean's hand and slashed the picket line . `` Up you go '' ! ! He said . `` Ride '' ! ! Dean resisted Mike's attempt to push him toward the horse . `` Why not you '' ? ? He protested . `` Dammit '' ! ! Mike said frantically . `` You're lighter than me . It's our only chance now . Try to find these Feds . The rest of us can fort up in the house and hang on until you get back . You're the one that's taking the big chance '' . Dean still hesitated , but Mike lifted him almost bodily into the saddle and thrust the reins in his hand . `` No telling how good this horse is '' , Mike panted . `` Favor him and save something in case you hit trouble . Watch out for Apaches when it comes daylight . Take the pistol . You might need it . We'll still have the rifle , and I might be able to round up some more . I'll stampede the rest of these horses so they can't chase you '' . Dean leaned from the saddle and gave him a mighty whack on the back . `` McLish '' , he said as he kicked the horse into motion , `` I'd be a mighty sad man if we never met again '' . Then he was on his way at a gallop . Mike ran down the line , slashing picket ropes with the bayonet . He lifted a screeching war whoop . That touched off a total stampede . He darted inside the stockade and freed the horses there . These poured through the gate and joined the flight . The animals thundered away into the moonlight , heading for the ridges . The guerrillas were swarming from their bivouac at the west end of the enclosure . `` Apaches '' ! ! Mike yelled . `` They're stealin' the stock '' ! ! He scuttled in shadow along the east wall of the stockade and then followed the south wall until he was at the rear of the two frame buildings . He crouched there . His shout had been taken up and repeated . The guerrillas were running across the parade ground and through the rear gate in the wake of the departing horses . All were carrying guns they had seized up , but they were half-clad or hardly clad at all . Durkin and Calhoun came running from the post . They had pistols in their hands . They bawled questions that were not answered in the uproar . They followed the others toward the east gate . Beyond the stockade rifles began to explode as some of the guerrillas fired at shadows that they imagined were Apaches . Mike made a dash to the rear of the frame buildings . He crawled beneath the two supply wagons which stood between the buildings and peered around a corner . The area was deserted . A man was standing in the open door of the lighted orderly room a few yards to Mike's left , but he , too , suddenly made up his mind and went racing to join the confused activity at the east end of the stockade . Mike crawled to the door and peered in . The orderly room seemed to be deserted . A lantern hung from a peg , giving light . Ducking inside , he found that three rifles were stacked in a corner . A brace of pistols , holstered on belts , hung from a peg , along with ammunition pouches . An ammunition case stood open , containing canisters which contained powder cartridges . Mike seized a blanket from a pallet in a corner , spread it on the floor and used it to form a bag in which he placed his booty . Shouldering the load he peered from the door . His looting of the orderly room had taken only a minute or two and the vicinity was still clear of guerrillas . He looked at the looming hoods of the supply wagons , struck by a new inspiration . He set his bundle down . Snatching the lantern from its peg , he shattered its globe with a blow against a post . He picked up the powder canister and ran out . Bursting paper cartridges , he scattered powder beneath the nearest wagon and dumped the contents of the canister upon it . He shouldered the blanket again , backed off , and tossed the lantern with its open wick beneath the wagon . He turned and raced across the parade ground toward the rock house . Powder flame gushed beneath the wagon . The stockade was brilliantly lighted and the guerrillas sighted him . They realized the truth . Bullets began to snap past him . One struck the muzzle of one of the rifles that projected from the shoulder pack . Its force spun him around , but he recovered and got into stride again . A bullet tore the earth from beneath his foot when he was a stride or two from safety . Another struck him heavily in the thigh and he went down . Guerrillas were racing toward him . Susan and Julia came from the door and dragged him with them . The three of them floundered through the door into the interior and fell in a heap . Susan bounced to her feet and slammed the door . She crouched aside as bullets beat at the portal , chewing into the planks . Some tore entirely through the whipsawed post oak . The iron hinges held , but the planks were in danger of being torn from the crossbars . Mike rolled to Susan , grasped her around the knees , dragging her off her feet . He hovered over her to shield her , for spent bullets were thudding against the rear walls . He peered from a loophole . Guerrillas were only a dozen yards away , charging the house . Mike snatched a pistol from the heap of scattered booty and fired . He dropped a man with the first bullet . At the same moment Wheeler Fiske fired the rifle Mike had given him and another guerrilla was hit . That halted the rush . The guerrillas scattered for cover . The wagons were burning fiercely . The mudwagon had caught fire also . The blaze was spreading to the frame buildings . The guerrillas realized they faced a new problem . `` Gawdamighty '' ! ! One screeched . `` There goes our grub an' ammunition '' ! ! `` Get a bucket line going '' ! ! Calhoun shouted . `` Hurry ! ! Hurry '' ! ! The guerrillas began a frantic search for pails in which to bring water from the spring . But what few containers they found were inadequate . Many of them , in increasing panic , came running with water in their hats in a ludicrous effort . Both buildings were in flames . The heat drove the guerrillas back . The roof of the command post began to buckle . `` Drag the wagons to the spring '' ! ! Lew Durkin yelled . `` Run 'em right into the spring ! ! Hustle '' ! ! One of the wagons erupted a massive pillar of flame . A sizable supply of powder had been touched off . The wagons and the coach were beyond saving and so were the buildings . The glow of the fire reached through the openings in the windows , giving light enough to examine Mike's wound . The bullet had torn through the flesh just above the knee , inflicting an ugly gash that was forming a pool of blood on the floor . But it had missed the bone and had passed on through . Susan and Julia ripped strips from their clothing and bound the injury . Mike tested the leg and found that he was able to hobble around on it . `` So it wasn't the earthquake that made him return to his village '' ! ! `` No . Now dammit , I don't want to go into any more explanations . Here comes Jason . Keep this to yourself '' . Reverend Jason , looking worried , hurried toward us . `` Anything wrong , cap'n ? ? The men seem to think so '' . `` Dirion found a large war party south of us . They'll probably attack at dawn '' , Montero said . He brushed past the clergyman and walked into the center of the camp . Using his hands as a trumpet he shouted , `` Fort up ! ! Fort up ! ! There's a large war party on their way '' ! ! For a second , engages , cooks , voyageurs appeared struck dumb . Then Little Billy began shouting orders to round up the ponies and fill the water buckets and for the cooks to hurry up with the meal . They all flew into action . `` That was a terrible thing to do '' , I said to Oso . The Aricaras treated us like friends . And here all the time you knew the Sioux would be using our rifles on them ! ! God , what a world you people live in '' . Oso gave me an unruffled look . `` Old Knife's got the largest war party ever seen on the river '' , he said calmly . `` What would you have done in Montero's moccasins ? ? Let Old Knife come up and kill you and your people , or would you steer him on someone else '' ? ? He shook his head . `` Mr. Manuel did that in the war . That's why the British never got the tribes to fight for the King . Mr. Manuel whispered in the ears of the Sioux that the Cheyennes were comin' to raid 'em for their horses . Then he went on to the Cheyennes and told them that the Sioux was goin' to move up . He did that with all the Nations . Hell , they were fightin' each other so hard they had no time for anyone else . The War Department wrote Mr. Manuel a letter and said he was a hero . I saw that letter . He carried it in a little wallet made of fish skin '' . `` But that was war '' , I said . `` There's no war on now '' . `` You're wrong , Matt . In this country there's a war on every time the grass turns green . First it was the Nations against themselves , then it was them against the whites . And it's goin' to go on like this year after year until the white people take over this land '' . I remember being told it would happen so fast people would think it took place overnight . `` That's why this company's important . Once we get over the mountains others will come along . That's why the Trust don't want us to make it . That bastard Chambers ! ! -- Old Knife's not the only chief he'll get to do his dirty work ! ! Before we get through he'll have the Blackfeet hankerin' for our hair and our goods . Well , talkin' ain't goin' to help -- let's fort up '' ! ! As I dug in behind one of the bales we were using as protection , I grudgingly found myself agreeing with Oso's logic , especially when I imagined what would have happened to Missy if Old Knife's large party of screeching warriors had overrun our company . For , unlike the Sioux and the Crows , the Aricaras are not great horsemen , nor are they aggressive like the savage Blackfeet . More of an agricultural nation , they have relied on their warriors only for defense and for survival in the endless wars of the plains . Still , I was disgusted with myself for agreeing with Montero's methods . Surprisingly , he had told the others what he had done . In the brief moment I had to talk to them before I took my post on the ring of defenses , I indicated I was sickened by the methods men employed to live and trade on the river . `` I think Montero did right '' , Amy said firmly . `` Let the savages kill each other . What do we care '' ? ? Reverend Jason was understandably bitter . `` It was a terrible thing to do . Those little children . '' But Oso replied calmly , `` Trouble ain't easy to dodge out in this country , rev'rend '' . 28 . Attack Gray Eyes attacked our camp just as the first pink threads stitched together the hills and the sky . Our camp was in the center of a wide valley . Montero had set up a strong position , using every bale and box we had in addition to barricades of logs and brush . He had ordered the ponies brought inside the fortified circle and had assigned Pierre and a band of picked engages the job of trying to keep them steady under fire . The pony herd was the one flaw in our defense ; ; the Rees undoubtedly would try to cut down as many of the animals as possible . Wildly bucking horses would make the position difficult to defend against charging warriors . The cooks had prepared one of the best meals we'd had in a long time , and on Montero's orders had baked enough bread to last the day . Buckets were filled , the herd fed and watered . The worst part had been the waiting ; ; although we didn't expect the attack before dawn , the long cloudy night , filled with the sounds of the industrious insects , seemed endless . Coyotes and hunting wolves sounded like signaling Indian scouts , the whinny of a restless pony made one's skin crawl . Oso slept unconcernedly , his rifle cradled in his arms ; ; I didn't catch a wink . Every time I closed my eyes , I saw Gray Eyes rushing at me with a knife . It was a relief when they finally came . They poured through the opening in the valley , then spread out in a long line to come at us , brandishing their lances and filling the morning with their spine-chilling scalp cry . `` Oso '' , Montero called `` I'll get Gray Eyes '' . `` That'll be a pleasure to see '' , the big black murmured as he stared down the barrel of his rifle . `` Hold your fire '' , Montero was shouting . `` Wait until my shot . I'll shoot the first man who doesn't '' . I could see them in my sights . They were about a mile off ; ; under me the ground quivered slightly . At first they were only feathers and dark indistinguishable faces and bodies , hunched over their horses' heads . Gradually they emerged as men . Gray Eyes was in the lead . His face was split by a vermilion streak , his eyes were pools of white ; ; jagged red and black medicine symbols covered his chest . He was naked except for a clout . Next to him was a young boy I was sure had sat near me at one of the trading sessions . His mouth was open , his neck corded with the strain of his screams . I found his chest in my sights . It had a red circle . The circle came nearer and nearer . My God , how long is he going to wait , I thought . Montero's rifle cracked . At first I thought he had missed . Gray Eyes remained erect . The feathered lance was still above his head . As he started to slump over , another warrior swung him onto his horse . I squeezed the trigger . At the last second I dropped my sights from the bare chest and bright red circle to the chest of his pony . I saw the pony fall like a stone and the young warrior flew over its head , bouncing like a rubber ball . He started to run but Oso's shot caught him on the wing . He jerked once in the grass and lay still . `` If you're goin' to kill 'em -- ! ! Kill 'em '' ! ! Oso growled . What else he said was lost in the rattle of gunfire on all sides . The Aricaras broke under the devastating fire , wheeled and retreated . `` Lead up ! ! Lead up ! ! They'll be back '' ! ! Montero was shouting . Far up the valley I could see the Rees circling and reorganizing . Out in front of our walls the grass was covered with dead and dying men , war shields , lances , blankets and wounded and dead horses . The morning air was filled with the sweetish odor of new-spilled blood , the acrid stench of frightened horses , and the bitterness of burned powder . A horse screamed as it twisted from side to side in a frenzy . A rifle cracked ; ; the square head fell over . One of the warriors suddenly leaped to his feet and began running across the valley to the trees that lined the small creek . His legs pumped furiously , his long black hair streamed out behind him . There was a ragged volley . He was dead before he hit the ground . `` For Christ's sake , don't waste your powder on one of 'em '' ! ! Montero shouted furiously . `` Wait for the charge ! ! The charge , I tell you '' ! ! The sharp cries at the end of the valley were faint . They grew louder as the Indians charged again . I could see their faces glistening with sweat and bear grease , their mouths open , shouting their spine-chilling cries . `` Gray Eyes is back , , Montero said . The war captain had been badly wounded and was fighting to hold his seat . I could see the blood running down his chest . He was riding between two warriors , who held him erect when he started to slump . I forgot to aim . In my sights I watched him looming bigger and bigger . Montero's shot had caught him high in the chest ; ; there was no doubt he was dying . Again we waited for Montero . This time he delayed so long that some of the engages shouted frantically , but they held their fire . The horses were only several lengths away when he fired . The bullet flung Gray Eyes from his horse . Our rolling volley swept most of the other riders from their mounts . But a few reached our wall . I heard the whir of an ax and a Canadian's face burst apart in a bloody spray . I saw Little Billy rise and fire almost point blank and an Indian's face became shattered flesh and bone . A second leaped from his horse to the top of the bale , firing four arrows in such rapid succession it didn't seem possible they were in flight . Men screamed . Oso reached up , jerked the buck from the bale and snapped his neck . Other Indians were running at the ponies , shrilling and waving blankets . Reverend Jason got one , the Canadians the others . I saw the clergyman kneel for a moment by the twitching body of the man he had shot , then run back to his position . The ponies were almost uncontrollable . The pall of dust they raised made it difficult to see when the Aricaras charged again . This time more of them hurdled the barrier . A small Indian dived at Montero , who caught him with a swift upward stroke of his rifle butt . It sounded like a man kicking a melon . Above me a dark rider was whipping his pony with a quirt in an attempt to hurdle the bales . Although my shot killed his horse , he rolled off the bale on top of me . I could smell woodsmoke , grease , and oil . His eyes were dark , fluid , fearful , and he gave a sigh as my knife went in . Coming over the wall he had seemed like a hideous devil . Now under me I could see him for what he really was , a boy dressed up in streaks of paint . The Aricaras made one last desperate charge . It was pitiful to see the thin ranks of warriors , old and young , wheeling and twisting their ponies frantically from side to side only to be tumbled bleeding from their saddles by the relentless slam , slam of the cruelly efficient Hawkinses . Others , badly wounded , gripped hands in manes , knees in bellies , held on as long as possible and then , weak from ghastly wounds , slipped sideways , slowly , almost thoughtfully , to be broken under the slashing hoofs . Some gracefully soared from the backs of their wounded , screaming mounts to make one last defiant charge before the lead split their hearts or tore their guts . None of them reached our walls again . The few survivors grudgingly turned away . In the distance we could hear the drums and the wail of the death song . She was carrying a quirt , and she started to raise it , then let it fall again and dangle from her wrist . `` I saw your fire '' , she said , speaking slowly , making an effort to control her anger . `` You could burn down this whole mountainside with a fire that size . It wouldn't matter to a fool like you . It would to me '' . `` All right '' , Wilson said quickly . `` The fire's too big . And I appreciate the advice '' . He was losing patience again . An hour before , with the children asleep and nothing but the strange darkness , he would have appreciated company . She had helped him change his mind . `` I'm not advising you '' , she said . `` I'm telling you . That fire's too big . Let it burn down . And make sure it's out when you leave in the morning '' . He was taken aback . It took him a long time to compose himself . `` There's some mistake '' , he said finally . `` You're right about the fire . It's bigger than it has to be , though I don't see where it's doing any harm . But you're wrong about the rest of it . I'm not leaving in the morning . Why should I ? ? I own the place '' . She showed her surprise by tightening the reins and moving the gelding around so that she could get a better look at his face . It didn't seem to tell her anything . She glanced around the clearing , taking in the wagon and the load of supplies and trappings scattered over the ground , the two kids , the whiteface bull that was chewing its cud just within the far reaches of the firelight . She studied it for a long time . Then she turned back to Wilson and smiled , and he wasn't quite sure what she meant by it . `` You own this place '' ? ? She said , and her tone had softened until it was almost friendly . `` You bought it '' ? ? `` From a man in St. Louis '' , Wilson said . `` Jake Carwood . Maybe you know him '' . The girl laughed . `` I know him . I ought to . My father ran him off here six years ago '' . Wilson didn't say anything . He stood watching the girl , wondering what was coming next . She had picked up the quirt and was twirling it around her wrist and smiling at him . `` Carwood didn't tell you that '' , she said . `` No '' , Wilson said . `` But it's understandable . It's not the kind of thing that a man would be proud of . And it doesn't make any difference . He sold me a clear title . I have it with me , right here . If you want to see '' -- `` Never mind '' , she said sternly . `` It wouldn't matter to my father , and not to me . I meant what I said about that fire . Be sure it's out when you leave . That's all . I'll let you go back to doing the dishes now '' . It was meant to insult him , and didn't quite succeed . He took the reins just below the bit and held them firmly , and it was his turn to smile now . `` I don't mind washing dishes now and then '' , he said pleasantly . `` It doesn't hurt . It might hurt you , though . Somebody might mistake you for a woman '' . He meant to say more , but he never got the chance . She was quick . She brought the quirt down , slashing it across his cheek , and he tried to step back . She swung the quirt again , and this time he caught her wrist and pulled her out of the saddle . She came down against him , and he tried to break her fall . He grabbed her by the shoulders and went down on one knee , taking her weight so that some of the wind was driven out of him . It made him a little sick , and he let go of her . He got up slowly , and she was already on her feet , and he stood facing her . He wiped the blood from his cheek . `` I ought to '' -- he said . He was shaking with anger , his breath coming in long , painful gasps . `` That quirt -- I ought to use it on you , where it would do the most good . If you were a man '' -- `` She isn't , mister '' . The voice came from behind him , and Wilson turned . The fire had gone down , and the man was only a shadow against the trees . But a moment later he brought his horse forward into the light , and Wilson had a good look at him . He was tall and dark-skinned , a half-breed , Wilson thought . And he was handsome , despite the long thin scar that slanted across his cheek . `` She's not a man , mister '' , he said . `` I am . If you've got any ideas '' . He raised the Winchester and pointed it at Wilson's chest . `` Put the rifle down , Joseph '' , the girl said . She seemed irritated . `` I thought I told you to stay home '' . The half-breed eased the Winchester down and rested it across his lap . The scar looked pure white in the half-darkness ; ; his eyes were black and deep-set , and expressionless . `` You shouldn't be riding up here after dark , Judith '' , he said quietly . `` I can take care of this . It's no job for you '' . The girl tapped the quirt impatiently against her knee and glared at him . He took it without flinching . `` I said go home , Joseph . You've got no business up here '' . The half-breed didn't answer this time . But the scar seemed to pull hard at the corner of his mouth , and his eyes were hurt and angry . It made Wilson wonder . He watched the half-breed as he turned silently . They could hear the pony's feet on the dry leaves for a while , then the sound faded out . Wilson brushed the dust from his coat . `` Who was that '' ? ? He asked . `` Your personal guard ? ? You're pretty hard on him '' . `` He works for my father '' , the girl said , and then seemed to change her mind . `` He's a friend . His name's Joseph Sanchez . Is there anything else you want to know '' ? ? `` Not now '' , Wilson said . `` I guess I'll find out soon enough . You've got blood on your cheek . Not yours . Mine . It must have got there when you fell against me '' . She wiped it off with the sleeve of her coat . `` I'll bet that's as close as you've been to a man since you were a baby '' , Wilson said . He saw her hand start to work down the leather thong toward the handle of the quirt , and he grabbed her wrist . `` Oh , no '' , he said , and he was without humor now . `` I've had enough of that . I've had enough of you . I don't know what goes on around here , and I don't care . I don't know what makes you think you can get away with this kind of business , and I don't care about that , either . You took me by surprise . But I'll know how to handle you next time '' . She brought up her free hand to hit him , but this time he was quicker . He side-stepped her blow and she fell , stumbling against the gelding . She finally regained her balance and got up in the saddle . Her hat had come off and fallen behind her shoulders , held by the string , and he could see her face more clearly than he had at any time before . He had forgotten that she was so pretty . But her prettiness was what he had noticed first , and all the other things had come afterward : cruelty , meanness , self-will . He had known women like that , one woman in particular . And one had been too many . He watched the girl until she had gone into the trees , and waited until he couldn't hear the sound of her horse any longer , then went up to where the children were sleeping . They weren't sleeping , of course , but they thought they were doing him a favor by pretending . He hadn't shown up too well in their eyes , letting himself be browbeaten by a woman . They expected greater things from him , regardless of how trying the circumstances , and they were disappointed . And determined not to show it . They lay a little too stiffly , with their eyes straining to stay closed . `` Go to sleep '' , he said . `` Both of you . There's better things to do than listen to something like that . I'll be down at the creek finishing the dishes , if you want me '' . He found the pan where he had dropped it and carried it back down to the stream . The coyote was calling again , and he hoped that this time there would be no other sounds to interrupt it . Not tonight , at any rate . He had a feeling that the girl meant trouble . If she did , he could stand it better in the light . He scrubbed absent-mindedly at the pans and reflected on how things had turned out . That afternoon when they had pulled up in front of the broken-down ranch house , his hopes had been high . Already some of the pain had gone from Amelia's death . Not all of it . There would still be plenty of moments of regret and sadness and guilty relief . But they were starting a new life . And they had almost everything they needed : land , a house , two whiteface bulls , three horses . The land wasn't all Wilson had expected of it . Six hundred and forty acres , the old man back in St. Louis had said ; ; good grass , good water . Well , the grass was there , though in some places the ground was too steep for a cow to get to it . The water was there , so much of it that it spread all through the dead orchard . And there was a house ; ; livable perhaps , but badly in need of repairs . In the last analysis , though , Wilson had little cause to complain . The place had been cheap -- just the little he had left after Amelia's burial -- and it would serve its purpose . There was only one place where Jake Carwood's description had gone badly awry : the peace and quiet . It hadn't started out that way . And he had a feeling -- thanks to the girl -- that things would get worse before they got better . 2 They had the house cleaned up by noon , and Wilson sent the boy out to the meadow to bring in the horses . He stood on the porch and watched him struggling with the heavy harness , and finally went over to help him . Kathy was already in the wagon . They were going to town , and they were both excited . Wilson backed the team into the traces , and wished they weren't going to town at all . He had an uneasy feeling about it . That girl last night , what was her name ? ? Judith Pierce . It was the only thing about her that was the least bit hard to remember . He finished with the team and filled his pipe and stood looking about him . He had spent two hours riding around the ranch that morning , and in broad daylight it was even less inviting than Judith Pierce had made it seem . There was brush , and stands of pine that no grass could grow under , and places so steep that cattle wouldn't stop to graze . But there was water . There was an artificial lake just out of sight in the first stand of trees , fed by a half dozen springs that popped out of the ground above the hillside orchard . Yes , there was plenty of water , too much , and that was probably the trouble . There were tracks of cattle all over his six hundred and forty acres . The first part of the road was steep , but it leveled off after the second bend and curled gradually into the valley . It was hotter once they reached the flat , and drier , but the grass was better . A warm breeze played across it , moving it like waves . A red-tailed hawk flew in behind them and stayed there , watching for any snakes or rabbits that they might stir up from the side of the road . It took them an hour before they came to the first houses of Kelseyville . The town was about what Wilson expected : one main street with its rows of false-fronted buildings , a water tower , a few warehouses , a single hotel ; ; all dusty and sunbaked . The place was quiet . Such was my state of mind that I did not question the possibility of this ; ; under the circumstances I was only too willing to confess all . I was nearly thirty at the time . I went to the hall in the afternoons only , on these preliminary matters . It was dark and , I sensed , very large ; ; only the counter at one end was lighted by a long fluorescent tube suspended directly above it . Sometimes I was aware of people moving about in the darkness . I would turn away from my writing in the hope of getting a good look at them but I never quite succeeded . A glimpse of three of four vague figures , at the most . Drifting here and there . Squatting , as if waiting . The pulsing glow of a cigarette . Since they could see me but I not them , their presence in the hall disturbed me . The clerk paid them no attention . This impressed me , until I realized how limited was his sphere of influence . His job simply consisted in registering new men . When the phone rang he answered it . His authority extended to the far edge of the counter , no further . None of the men hanging around the hall bothered to speak to him . Baldness was attacking his pate . He spoke to me in a gruff voice , an affectation which quite belied his personality . He wore his white shirt open at the neck , revealing a bit of scrawny pale chest underneath . It was obvious that he wished himself different from the sort of person he thought he was . But it was not easy for him and he often slipped . When one of the men in the hall behind us spat on the floor and scraped his boot over the gob of spittle I noticed how the clerk winced . I felt certain he was really a spineless little man . His hat ( the cause of his baldness ? ? ) hung on a hook on the wall , and underneath it I could see his tie , knotted , ready to be slipped over his head , a black badge of frayed respectability that ought never to have left his neck . The morning's tabloids were on the counter , and a stack of dog-eared men's magazines . On a shelf in the office behind the counter was a small radio dialed permanently on a station which broadcast only vulgar commercials and cheap popular music . Everything about the clerk was trivial . Once , pressing him , I learned that his job was only part-time , in the afternoons when nothing went on in the hall . Noticing my disappointment he attempted to salvage what scraps and shreds of authority he felt might still be clinging to his person . With distaste I saw him assume a pompous air . When he saw me coming he turned his radio off . He made a show of rearranging my forms on the shelf . He would pick up the ringing phone with studied negligence , then bark into it with gruff importance . What limited knowledge he possessed he forced upon me . In the mornings , I was informed , fluorescent tubes , similar to the one above the counter , illuminated the entire hall . They , and the two large fans which I could dimly see as daylight filtered through their vents , down at the far end of the hall , could be turned on by a master switch situated inside the office . He pointed out the switch to me and for a moment I foolishly believed that he would let deed follow words . I was shown , instead , a batch of white tickets of the sort handed out , he told me , every morning . Now , here was something of obvious importance to me , yet when I reached for the tickets he snatched them away from my hand . He couldn't afford to have anyone mess around with them , he said . Each of those tickets was of great value to its rightful recipient . I withdrew my hand . Later I would remember what this pompous little man had told me about the worth of a ticket . Having nothing else to do except wait for my forms to be processed , I gave myself over to speculations concerning the hall itself . When suitably lighted , what would it look like ? ? The presence of the two exhaust fans seemed to indicate that the hall could become crowded for air . One afternoon , upon receiving permission and the necessary instructions from the clerk , I had visited the toilet adjoining the hall . By counting the number of stalls and urinals I attempted to form a loose estimate of how many men the hall would hold at one time . For although I had crossed a corner of the hall on my way to the toilet I still could not tell for sure how far to the rear the darkness extended . I could observe the two fans down at the end , but their size in themselves meant nothing to me as long as I had no measure of comparison . I had for some time been hoping , in vain , for one of the dim figures to pass between the fan vents and myself . I knew that three or four of them were almost always present in the hall , but what they were doing , and exactly where , I could not tell . It was , I felt , possible that they were men who , having received no tickets for that day , had remained in the hall , to sleep perhaps , in the corners farthest removed from the counter with its overhead light . This light did not penetrate very far back into the hall , and my eyes were hindered rather than aided by the dim daylight entering through the fan vents when I tried to pick out whatever might be lying , or squatting , on the floor below . Also the clerk appeared to disapprove of my frequent curious glances back over my shoulder . No sooner would I turn my head away from the counter before he would address me , at times quite sharply , in order to bring back my attention . And I had hardly finished my business in the toilet on the aforementioned occasion when the lights in that place , like the hall lights controlled from the switch in the office , flicked off and on impatiently . This sort of petty vigilance annoyed me . I felt certain it was self-appointed . It sprang from a type of mentality I'd encountered often enough but certainly had not expected to find here . I decided to see no more of the clerk until the processing of my papers was completed . I felt strongly attached to the hall , however , and hardly a day passed when I did not go to look at it from a distance . I lived in a state of suspense because of it . I could not cling to my past nor did I wish to . I had signed it off on the forms . My future lay solely with the hall , yet what did I know about the hall at this point ? ? Although I had been inside it I had not yet seen it functioning . I wished to prepare myself but did not even know what sort of clothes I ought to be wearing . I did not despair , however ; ; far from it ! ! I was constantly searching for clues around the neighborhood of the hall . Though only a relatively short walk separated it from my own part of town , its character was wholly foreign to me . Large warehouses flanked the street on which the hall fronted . The river was only a few blocks away but an unbroken line of piers prevented me from seeing it . Sometimes I noticed the tops of ships' masts and funnels reaching above the pier roofs . The sounds issuing from beyond -- winches whirring , men shouting -- indicated great activity and excited me . The hall , on the other hand , appeared lifeless and deserted on these long waterfront afternoons . It resembled nothing I'd ever seen before . Its front was windowless , but irregularities in the masonry might be an indication that windows , now blinded , had once looked out upon the street . I kept circling the block hoping to see , from the street behind it , the rear of the hall . But it was not a tall structure and other buildings concealed it . For weeks I wandered about this neighborhood of warehouses and garages , truck terminals and taxi repair shops , gasoline pumps and longshoremen's lunch counters , yet never did I cease to feel myself a stranger there . I returned to the hall , despite my dislike for the clerk . As I had expected , he insisted that my visits to the hall would do nothing to further the process of my application . Meanwhile spring had passed well into summer . At last , when I put it to him directly , the clerk was forced to admit that the delay in my case was unusual . When I asked him what , if anything , I could do about it , he surprised me by referring me to the director of the hall . I could consult this personage on any weekday morning , though not before ten o'clock . The clerk impressed this upon me : that I should not arrive in the hall before ten o'clock . When I went for my interview with the director I saw why . Although it was dark as usual I could see that the hall had only recently contained a great many people . Cigarette butts littered the floor . The big fans were going , drawing from the large room the remnants of stale smoke which drifted about in pale strata underneath the ceiling . I had felt the draft they were making while mounting the stairs . The staircase itself seemed still to be echoing the heavy footfalls of many men . I stopped by the counter . No one was behind it , but in the rear wall of the office I noticed , for the first time , a door which had been left partially open . Past it I could see part part of a desk , a flag in a corner , a rug on the floor . The director's office . I rapped my knuckles on the counter . The director came to the door . I was at once disappointed , although just what I had expected him to look like I could not have explained . He was a man in his late forties , with graying hair , of medium height ; ; he looked dapper in a lightweight summer suit , brown silk tie and green-tinted soft collar . He wore perforated , white-topped shoes ; ; they somehow made me expect to see him launch into a vaudeville tapdance routine any moment . But he came toward me sedately enough , showed me around the counter , offered me a seat inside his office , then walked to a file cabinet and got out my application . I had the impression that he had read my forms , perhaps several times . He did not look at them now . As he lowered himself on the chair behind his desk I wondered what this dapper , slightly ridiculous man could possibly have to do with the workings of the hall . He spoke , in a voice as immaculate as his appearance . Why had I registered ? ? Begging my pardon , he must express his astonishment over seeing a person of my background applying at the hall . He had looked over my forms and was impressed by what he had seen there ; ; indeed , my scholastic qualifications were such that he , a college graduate himself , must envy me them . Was I sure , he asked , that I knew what I was applying for ? ? What sort of men I would come into contact with , at the hall ? ? These questions did not surprise me ; ; I felt certain that the director , like the afternoon clerk , seldom moved beyond the counter , that the hall , to them , was a jungle , a dark and unwelcome place . Though I doubted that he would understand me , I told the director my motives for applying . I had always , I said , hankered after working hard with my hands . This desire , I went on , growing voluble as my conviction was aroused , had mounted at such a rate recently that I now found its realization necessary not only to my physical but also to my spiritual wellbeing . To this effect I had already severed all connections which bound me to my former existence . The flat , hard cap was small , but he thrust it to the back of his head . `` Tie him up '' . `` Hell with it '' . Before they could guess his intention Rankin stepped forward and swung the guard's own gun against the uncovered head , hard . The man went over without sound , falling to the bare floor . Barton said harshly , `` Why did you do that '' ? ? Rankin sneered at him . `` What did you want me to do , kiss him ? ? He dumped me in solitary twice '' . Barton caught the lighter man's shoulder and swung him around . `` Let's get one thing straight , you and me . The only reason we brought you was to get Miller out . If you ever try anything without my orders I'll kill you '' . Fred Rankin looked at him . It seemed to Barton that the green eyes mocked him , the thin-lipped smile held insolence , but he had no time to waste now . `` Come on . Let's move '' . They filed out through the guard-room door , into the paved square . There were three other men within this prison whom Barton would have liked to liberate , but they were in other cell blocks . There was no chance . They moved slowly , toward the main gate , following the wall . There was no moon . They had chosen this night purposely . They reached the guard house without alerting the men on the walls above , and Powers slipped through the door . Two men were on duty inside , playing pinochle , relaxed . They looked up in surprise as Powers came in . `` What are you doing out of the block '' ? ? `` It's Curtiss '' , he said , naming the man Rankin had hit . `` I've got to have help '' . They stared at him . The sergeant in charge climbed to his feet . `` What's wrong with him '' ? ? `` He's having some kind of a fit '' . The sergeant turned to the door . As he passed through it Barton shoved his gun against the man's side . `` One sound and you're dead '' . The sergeant froze . Powers had not followed . Powers was covering the remaining guard . The man half-reached for the cord of the alarm bell . Powers knocked his arm aside . Deliberately , with none of Rankin's viciousness , he laid the barrel of his gun alongside the guard's head . They were free . Even Barton could not quite believe it . It had gone without a hitch . They slid through the wicket in the big gate , ghosted across the dark ground . Five minutes later they reached the horses . Barton was relieved to see that Carl Dill and Emmett Foster had brought extra mounts . He had been worried that with Miller and Rankin added to the escape party they would be short . No one hurried . They walked the horses , heading along the river , Barton and Emmett Foster in the lead , seven men riding quietly through the night . The only thing which would have attracted attention was that two wore the uniform of prison guards , three the striped suits of convicts . Five miles . In a small grove against the river they halted , turning deep into the protection of the trees . Foster had brought extra clothing also . A good man , Emmett . He had been one of the original Night Riders , one who had escaped the trial . It was to him that Barton had sent Carl Dill on Dill's release from the prison . Clyde Miller was crying softly to himself , shedding his striped suit and fumbling into the nondescript butternut pants , the worn brown shirt . Kid Boyd was unusually silent , Rankin watchful , a few paces apart . Barton finished his dressing and extended his hand to Powers . `` I won't even try to thank you '' . The ex-prison guard was embarrassed . He said in a studied voice , `` I didn't do it for you . I did it for the valley . You're the only man the Night Riders will follow . We've been starving and I don't like to starve '' . Barton turned away , his eyes falling upon Rankin beside his horse . `` Good luck '' . The murderer lifted his head . `` Meaning you want me to ride out '' ? ? `` You aren't one of us . There's nothing for you here '' . `` I got no place to go '' . Barton hesitated . He did not trust Rankin , his violent temper , his killer instinct . But ten years in prison had taught him realities . They were in a fight , outweighed in both numbers and money . It was all right to put a bunch of ranchers onto horses , to call them Night Riders , to set out to attack the largest mining combination the country had ever seen if all they wanted was adventure . But if they really hoped to succeed they needed professionals , men who knew how to use a gun against men , who would match the killers on the other side . `` Your choice '' , he said briefly , and turned to Kid Boyd . `` Bury those uniforms so they won't be found '' . Then Barton touched Carl Dill's arm and moved off , up the river bank . He wanted a careful , uninterrupted report from Dill on the conditions in the valley . They squatted on their heels in the deep mud and Dill found a cigar in his breast pocket , passing it over silently . He too knew the agony of going for weeks , sometimes months without the solace of tobacco . Mitchell Barton drew in the fragrance deeply , letting the smoke lie warm and soothing in his throat for a moment before he exhaled . Through the gloom he could not see the man beside him clearly but he knew him thoroughly . For his first five years in prison , they had shared a cell . Carl Dill was neither a rancher nor a valley man . He had been the auditor for the mining syndicate , and he had stolen fifty thousand dollars of the syndicate's money . He had done time for the theft . The one thing they had in common was their hatred . Both hated Donald Kruger . It had drawn them together , and since his release from prison Dill had worked tirelessly to effect this night's escape . He said now , `` I've got the perfect headquarters set up . The old Haskell mine '' . Mitch Barton knew the place . Twenty years before a group of Easterners had bought out the Haskell claims in the rocky hills south of Grass Valley . They had spent a million dollars , carving in a road , putting up buildings , drilling their haulage tunnel . Then the vein had petered out and the whole project had been abandoned . `` The road's washed badly '' , said Dill , `` but there's a trail you can get over with a horse . A company of cavalry couldn't come in there if two men were guarding that trail '' . Barton nodded . `` How do the valley people feel '' ? ? `` As mad as ever . But Kruger's men keep them off balance , and they don't trust me . I'm an outsider . When they learn you're in the hills though , they'll rally , don't worry about that '' . Barton waited for a long moment , then asked the question which lay always uppermost in his mind . `` My boy . Did you find him '' ? ? Dill was silent as if he hated to answer , and Barton had a cold , sick feeling of apprehension . `` He's in Morgan's Ferry '' . Barton half-straightened in surprise . `` What's he doing there '' ? ? Again Dill hesitated . `` Dealing faro '' . `` Dealing faro ? ? How come '' ? ? `` Your sister-in-law has the faro bank in Cap Ayres' saloon '' . Barton cursed under his breath . After another long pause he asked , `` How many people know who they are '' ? ? `` Everyone . Your cousin Finley saw to that . He's quite a rat , you know . He sold out to Kruger's men . He's informed them of everything you've ever written him . He wants your ranch '' . Barton stood up . He said tensely , `` All right . Let's go get the boy '' . Dill had come up also . `` I was afraid of this . I almost didn't tell you '' . `` If you hadn't I'd have killed you '' . Dill's voice tightened . `` But you can't ride into the Ferry . That's what they'll expect you to do . They'll be there waiting for you . I understand how you feel about the child . '' `` The hell you do '' . Barton's voice was rougher than Dill had ever heard it . `` I never saw him . My wife died in childbirth after I was sent away . `` I can't leave him there . Donald Kruger would like nothing better than to hold him as hostage , and I wouldn't entrust a snake to his tender care . I've got to get the boy . Let's ride '' . Chapter two Barton's men cut the telegraph wires in half a dozen places , carrying away whole sections to make repairs more difficult . It was over an hour before their escape was discovered , but still the news that Barton was free flashed across the central portion of the state . It reached Donald Kruger in his massive home in Burlingame . It reached the mines at North San Juan and Bloomfield . It brought men out of bed and sent them into hurried conferences . For everyone involved knew that the whole valley was a powder keg , and Mitchell Barton the fuse which could send it into explosive violence . Creighton Hague sat in his office above the Ione pit . The office was of logs , four rooms , each heated by an iron stove . The building was dwarfed by the scene outside . There a dozen giant monitors played their seventy-five-foot jets of water against the huge seam of tertiary gravel which was the mountainside . The gravel was the bed of an ancient river , buckled in some prehistoric upheaval of earth . It was partially cemented by ages and pressure , yet it crumpled before the onslaught of the powerful streams , the force of a thousand fire hoses , and with the gold it held washed down through the long sluices . A million dollars' of gold a month . A million tons of rock and soil and brush . The monitors ran twenty-four hours each day . Their roar , like the swelling volume of a hundred tornadoes could be heard for miles . Hague , like all who worked near the pits , was partly deafened from the constant assault against his eardrums . He was a big man , wearing a neat flannel shirt against the cold foothill air . Fat showed in loose rolls beneath the shirt . Ten years older than Mitch Barton , he had clawed his way up from mucker in the pits to manager of the operation . He was proud of his accomplishments , proud of his job , proud that Donald Kruger and his associates trusted him . He lived and breathed for the mining company . No man could have reached his spot nor held it without being ruthless , and Hague had made a virtue of ruthlessness all of his life . There came a ghost of noise at the office door and Hague swung to see Kodyke in the entrance from the outer room . Hague had never accustomed himself to Kodyke . The man was tall , thin , with a narrow face and a too-large nose . The eyes always held Hague , eyes of a dead man , lidless as a lizard's , with the fixed intensity of a cobra . Even Hague was repelled by the machinelike deadliness that was Kodyke . He knew nothing about the man's history . Kodyke had appeared at the mine one day bearing a letter from Kruger . Kodyke was to head the dread company police . He ran the change rooms . He threw out the hi-graders . He supervised the cleanups and handled the shipments of raw gold which each week went out to San Francisco . Hague squeezed down his uneasy dislike . He pulled open the top drawer of his desk and drew out a tintype . `` This is Mitchell Barton . He broke out of Folsom last night . Apparently he bribed one of the guards . We want him back there or we want him dead '' . Kodyke took the picture in a lean hand , studying it thoughtfully . `` Dangerous '' ? ? `` Dangerous , yes . You know how the ranchers in the valley are . They blame us for all their troubles . Ten years ago they blew up some of our ditches . It cost us a hundred thousand dollars and thirty days lost time to fix them . We don't want Barton's Night Riders loose again '' . The gunman nodded , slipping the picture into his breast pocket , saying nothing . Normally Hague wasted no words , but now he found himself unable to stop their flow although he knew Kodyke was aware of all he said . If she sensed any unusual preoccupation on the part of her mother , she did not comment upon it . After they had finished eating , Melissa took Sprite the kitten under her arm -- `` so that Auntie Grace can teach it about the whistle '' -- and climbed into the station wagon beside her mother . She had offered to walk , but Pamela knew she would not feel comfortable about her child until she had personally confided her to the care of the little pink woman who chose to be called `` Auntie '' . When they reached their neighbor's house , Pamela said a few polite words to Grace and kissed Melissa lightly on the forehead , the impulse prompted by a stray thought -- of the type to which she was frequently subject these days -- that they might never see one another again . Then she turned the station wagon around and headed it back down the hill , with the village as her ostensible destination . As she drove , she thought about her plan . It was really quite simple . So simple , in fact , that it might even work -- although Pamela , now , in her new frame of mind , was careful not to pretend too much assurance . That mistake , she thought , had cost her dearly these past few days , and she wanted to avoid falling into any more of the traps that the mountain might set for her . She must be cautious so as not to alert the scheming forest . When the station wagon drew abreast of the dusty dirt road that led up to the porch of the Culver house , Pamela turned the wheel , guiding the car to its familiar parking spot close to the house , and stopped . All of her movements were careful and methodical , partaking of the stealth of a criminal who has plotted his felony for months in advance and knows exactly which step to take next in the course of the final execution of his crime . She locked the ignition , removed the keys , stepped out of the car and went into the house . Here , she dropped the keys on a small table beside the door and went upstairs to her bedroom . On her bureau lay a small , brass ornament of simple design and faded engraving -- an object which , Pamela believed now , had been the property of her great-grandfather , Major Hiram Munroe Culver . He had belonged to this land and , perhaps , had desecrated it -- and this was the only material symbol that remained of him . If she , Pamela , were being held responsible for his crimes , then hers must be the final act of expiation . She would return this symbol to the mountain , as one pours seed back into the soil every Spring or as ancient fertility cults demand annual human sacrifice . Slowly and thoughtfully , she slipped the ornament into the pocket of her slacks , moved down the stairs and out of the house . There was only one place where the mountain might receive her -- that unnamed , unnameable pool harbored in its secret bosom . Atonement , if atonement were possible , could only be made at that sacred , sacrificial basin . It was there that she would have to enact her renunciation , beg forgiveness . Perhaps it was insane , Pamela thought . Perhaps it was all a vividly conceived dream . But she was caught in it , and she faced the terrible possibility that , if it were a dream , it was one from which she might never awaken . Facing the forest now , she who had not dared to enter it before , walked between two trees at random and headed in what she believed was the direction of the pool . She remembered little of her previous journey there with Grace , and she could but hope that her dedication to her mission would enable her to accomplish it . The forest was open and freely welcoming , extending an enchanted hand . The ground was covered with soft pine needles and the slope was gentle . Birds chirped and chattered in the trees and the sun , all dewy-eyed and soft , caressed her shoulders warmly from time to time . It was not , thought Pamela , such an evil place after all . No wonder Melissa responded so completely to its beckoning . Perhaps she had no reason to fear these trees that whispered their secrets above her head as she passed . Was it not possible , after all , that the forest was in league with her and her child that its sympathy lay with the Culvers that she had erred in failing to understand this ? ? Pamela felt calm and peaceful as she walked along . The slight flutter that had disturbed the motion of her heart when she entered the forest was gone now , and even the dim groves of trees through which she occasionally passed did not reawaken her fear . She regarded them as signs that she was nearing the glen she sought , and she was glad to at last be doing something positive in her unenunciated , undefined struggle with the mountain and its darkling inhabitants . Having persisted too long in deliberate ignorance and denial of the forces that threatened her , Pamela was relieved now to admit their potency and to be taking definite steps toward grappling with them . A few days ago , she would have thought such an expedition as this utterly ridiculous ; ; today , on the contrary , it seemed utterly reasonable . She did not pause to consider what she would do if her plan should fail ; ; she directed all of her mental and physical energy toward achieving this one goal . If , as she walked , her steps fumbled from time to time , she chose to ignore that omen . If the slope grew steeper and the groves more dim , she tried not to heed . Success depended upon maintaining her equanimity ; ; she must be poised and proud and unafraid in order to prove to the mountain that she was in earnest . The forest took on an impersonal aspect . It did not care what sort of person prowled its woods , plucked at its bark or stripped the berries from its bushes . Unconcerned , indifferent , unmotivated , the forest was simply there -- fighting man's depredations with more abundant growth and man's follies with its own musical evening laughter . Red man or white man , pacifist or killer , the forest would accept them all -- knowing that it could thrive equally well on slaughter and beneficence ; ; knowing that its ageless mass would always dwarf the short span of time allotted to any man . Pamela shook her head . She must not think about time . That was another one of those traps . In her grim pursuit of tranquillity , Pamela focused her thoughts on her husband . If , when this was all over , she found the words to tell him about it , she wondered if he would ever understand . How could he comprehend her need when he himself was innocent ? ? Indian ghosts would not impinge upon his nights , nor would his days be haunted by the dimly-outlined , ill-conceived figure of her benighted ancestor . His bright , daylight mind would whistle away such images ; ; they would not dare to face his scoffing . Pamela was glad Jim was nowhere near . His presence would have interfered with her duty . The mountainside grew steeper and she slipped once or twice on the smooth pine needles . The trees huddled more closely together , their limbs and leaves intertwined in a coarse curtain against the sun . Bushes and vines abetted the rocks in forming thorny detours for the struggling stranger , and without the direct light of the sun to act as compass , Pamela could no longer be positive of her direction . Nevertheless , she continued to move upward . She was sure she would reach the pool by climbing , and she clung to that belief despite the increasing number of obstacles . The forest had become an alien world where she strove , alone , unprotected , unguided , to deal with whatever hindrances were offered . It was a bold , dark castle of pine boughs that stood like a medieval fortress , eclipsing the sun and human time . At one and the same time , she was within it but still searching for the drawbridge that would give her entry . Silence came into the forest -- a solid being that clapped its hand over the murmuring mouths of the birds and the whispered comfort of the trees . Silence walked at Pamela's side , its presence numbingly close , yet too far for her to hear . Silence stood in front of her , waiting , and in back of her , blocking her retreat . She stumbled over the root of a tree that protruded maliciously above the earth . In spite of her attempt to preserve her balance , she fell , bruising her arm on a naked stone . For a moment , she could not catch her breath and then , her breath returning in short , frightened spasms , she lifted herself to her feet laboriously . She started to brush the dirt and bits of leaves off her clothes . Her arm bled slightly , and the offended skin cried out in pain . She looked around . She was bewildered . She seemed to have come such a long distance -- too far for her destination which had wilfully been swallowed up in the greedy gloom of the trees . She stood quite still , trying to focus upon a direction in which to turn , a path to follow , a clue to guide her . She was standing in a thick grove . The trees were crowded so closely together that their branches overlapped , virtually shutting out the sun completely . The earth smelled moist and pungent as it might in a cave deprived of the cleansing effect of the sun's rays . She had the feeling that , under the mouldering leaves , there would be the bodies of dead animals , quietly decaying and giving their soil back to the mountain . The thought made Pamela shudder . A terrible chill swept through the grove . Not a breeze exactly , but a pocket of icy air that settled with a loathsome familiarity upon the deep confines of the grove , catching Pamela in a leering embrace . There was a peculiar density about it , a thick substance that could be sensed but never identified , never actually perceived . Where before had she felt or dreamt or imagined such a scene ? ? She already knew this unwholesome , chilling atmosphere that was somehow grotesquely alive . It enclosed her clammy hands and twined around her ankles . It crept into the open neck of her blouse and slid down her body , seeping into her flesh through all the quivering pores of her skin . It crawled across her breasts , suffocating the life in her nipples . It circled her thighs , exploring with its icy tentacles . It entered her body with the ghastly intimacy of an incubus , and its particles , spreading , creeping , crawling , joined themselves into steel bands that constricted her knees so tightly that they ached ; ; stifled her lungs so that her breath came in harsh gasps ; ; clutched her throat and sucked up the moisture in her mouth so that her tongue was dry and hard and stuck to the roof of her mouth and her teeth were clenched together in the rigid fixture of her jaws . She had to get away from here before this demoniac possession swallowed up the liquid of her eyes and sank into the fibers of her brain , depriving her of reason and sight . But she did not know which way to go . The shadows of the trees engulfed her , foreclosing every possible exit from the grove . She had been snared here by a vile sensuality that writhed around her throat in ever-tightening circles . She could not scream , for even if a sound could take shape within her parched mouth , who would hear , who would listen ? ? Does the mountain listen ? ? Pamela groped blindly . She had to escape . She had to move in some direction -- any direction that would take her away from this evil place . She thrust forward through the shadows and the trees that resisted her and tried to fling her back . Her own body protested , aching painfully where the blood in her veins had congealed , where cold demon wisps still clung and caressed . Every movement she made seemed unnecessarily noisy . Twigs cracked loudly under her feet ; ; bushes swished and scratched at her slacks ; ; tree branches snapped as she pushed them ruthlessly away from her . Miraculously , she found exactly the right statement . She began it deliberately , so that none of her words would be lost on him . `` I want to tell you something Thomas DeMontez Lord . I'm well aware that you've got a pedigree as long as my leg , and that I don't amount to anything . But '' -- `` But it don't matter a-tall '' , Lord supplied fondly . `` To me you'll always be the girl o' my dreams , an' the sweetest flower that grows '' . Beaming idiotically , he pooched out his lips and attempted to kiss her . She yanked away from him furiously . `` You shut up ! ! Shu-tt up-pp ! ! I've got something to say to you , and by God you're going to listen . Do you hear me ? ? You're going to listen '' ! ! Lord nodded agreeably . He said he wanted very much to listen . He knew that anything a brainy little lady like her had to say would be plumb important , as well as pleasin' to the ear , and he didn't want to miss a word of it . So would she mind speaking a little louder ? ? `` I think you stink , Tom Lord ! ! I think you're mean and hateful and stupid , and -- louder '' ? ? Said Joyce . `` Uh-huh . So I can hear you while I'm checkin' the car . Looks like we might be in for a speck of trouble '' . He opened the door and got out . He waited at the car side for a moment , looking down at her expectantly . `` Well ? ? Wasn't you goin' to say somethin' '' ? ? Then , helpfully , as she merely stared at him in weary silence , `` Maybe you could write it down for me , huh ? ? Print it in real big letters , an' I can cipher it out later '' . `` Aah , go on '' , she said . `` Just go the hell on '' . He grinned , nodded , and walked around to the front of the car . Lips pursed mournfully , he stared down at its crazily sagging left side . Then he hunkered down on the heels of his handmade boots , peered into the orderly chaos of axle , shock absorber , and spring . He went prone on his stomach , the better to pursue his examination . After a time , he straightened again , brushing the red Permian dust from his hands , slapping it from his six-dollar levis and his tailored , twenty-five-dollar shirt . He wore no gun -- a strange ommission for a peace officer in this country . Never , he'd once told Joyce , had he encountered any man or situation that called for a gun . And he really feels that way , she thought . That's really all he's got , all he is . Just a big pile of self-confidence in an almost teensy package . If I could make myself feel the same way She studied him hopefully , yearningly ; ; against the limitless background of sky and wasteland it was easy to confirm her analysis . Here in the God-forsaken place , the westerly end of nowhere , Tom Lord looked almost insignificant , almost contemptible . He was handsome , with his coal-black hair and eyes , his fine-chiseled features . But she'd known plenty of handsomer guys , and , conceding his good looks , what was there left ? ? He wasn't a big man ; ; rather on the medium side . Neither was he very powerful of build . He could move very quickly , she knew ( although he seldom found occasion to do so ) , but he was more wiry than truly strong . And his relatively small hands and feet gave him an almost delicate appearance . Just nothing , she told herself . Just so darned sure of himself that he puts the Indian sign on everyone . But , by gosh , I want him and I'm going to have him ! ! He caught her eye , came back around the car with the boot-wearer ; ; teetering , half-mincing walk . Why did these yokels still wear boots , anyway , when most had scarcely sat a horse in years ? ? He slid in at her side , tucked a cigar into his mouth , and politely proffered one to her . `` Oh , cut it out , Tom '' ! ! She snapped . `` Can't you stop that stupid clowning for even a minute '' ? ? `` This ain't your brand , maybe '' , Lord suggested . `` Or maybe you just don't feel like a cigar '' ? ? `` I feel like getting back to town , that's what I feel like ! ! Now , are you going to take me or am I supposed to walk '' ? ? `` Might get there faster walkin' '' , Lord drawled , `` seein' as how I got a busted front spring . On the other hand , howsomever , maybe you wouldn't either . I figger it's probl'y a sixty-five-mile walk , and I c'n maybe get this spring patched up in a couple of hours '' . `` How -- with what ? ? There's nothing out here but rattlesnakes '' . `` Now , ain't it the truth '' ? ? Lord laughed with secret amusement . `` Not a danged thing but rattlesnakes , so I reckon I'll get the boss rattler to help me '' . `` Tom ! ! For God's sake '' ! ! `` Looky '' . He pointed , cutting her off . `` See that wildcat '' ? ? She saw it then , the distant derrick of the wildcat -- a test well in unexplored country . And even with her limited knowledge of such things , she knew that the car could be repaired there ; ; sufficiently , at least , to get them back into town . A wildcatter had to be prepared for almost any emergency . He had to depend on himself , since he was invariably miles and hours away from others . `` Well , let's get going '' , she said impatiently . `` I '' -- She broke off , frowning . `` What did you mean by that rattlesnake gag ? ? Getting the boss rattlesnake to help you '' ? ? `` Why , I meant what I said '' , Lord declared . `` What else would I mean , anyways '' ? ? She looked at him , lips compressed . Then , with a shrug of pretended indifference , she took a compact from her purse and went through the motions of fixing her make-up . In his mood , it was the best way to handle him ; ; that is , to show no curiosity whatsoever . Otherwise , she would be baited into a tantrum -- teased and provoked until she lost control of herself , and thus lost still another battle in the maddening struggle of Tom Lord Vs. Joyce Lakewood . The car lurched along at a snail's crawl , the left-front mudguard banging and scraping against the tire , occasionally scraping against the road itself . Lord whistled tunelessly as he fought the steering wheel . He seemed very pleased with himself , as though some intricate scheme was working out exactly as he had planned . Along with this self-satisfaction , however , Joyce sensed a growing tension . It poured out of him like an electric current , a feeling that the muscles and nerves of his fine-drawn body were coiling for action , and that that action would be all that he anticipated . Joyce had seen him like this once before -- more than once , actually , but on one particularly memorable occasion . That was the day that he had practically mopped up the main street of Big Sands with Aaron McBride , field boss for the Highlands Oil & Gas Company . Tom had been laying for Aaron McBride for a long time , just waiting to catch him out of line . McBride gave him his opportunity when he showed up in town with a pistol on his hip . He had a legitimate reason for wearing it . It was payday for Highlands , and he was packing a lot of money back into the oil fields . Moreover , as long as the weapon was carried openly , the sheriff's office had made no previous issue of it . `` So what's this all about '' ? ? He demanded , when Lord confronted him . I'm not the only man in town with a gun , or the only one without a permit '' . It was the wrong thing to say . By failing to do as he was told instantly -- to take out a permit or return the gun to his car -- he had played into Lord's hands . The trouble was that he had virtually had to protest . The deputy had forced him to by his manner of accosting him . So , `` How about it '' ? ? He said . `` Why single me out on this permit deal '' ? ? `` Well , I'll tell you about that '' , Lord told him . `` We aim t' be see-lective , y'know ? ? Don't like to bother no one unless we have to , which I figger we do , in your case . Figger we got to be plumb careful with any of you Highlands big shots '' . McBride reddened . He himself had heard that there was gangster money in the company , but that had nothing to do with him . He was an honest man doing a hard job , and the implication that he was anything else was unbearable . `` Look , Lord '' , he said hoarsely . `` I know you've got a grudge against me , and maybe I can't blame you . You think that Highlands swindled you and I helped 'em do it . But you're all wrong , man ! ! I'm no lawyer . I just do what I'm told , and '' -- `` uh-huh . An' that could mean trouble with a fella that's workin' for crooks . So you get rid of that pistol right now , Mis-ter McBride . You do that or take you out a permit right now '' . McBride couldn't do either , of course . Not immediately , as the deputy demanded . Not without a face-saving respite of at least a few minutes . To do so would make his job well-nigh impossible . Oil-field workers were a rough-tough lot . How could he exert authority over them -- make them toe the line , as he had to -- if he knuckled under to this small-town clown ? ? `` I'll get around to it a little later '' , he mumbled desperately . `` Just as soon as I go to the bank , and '' -- `` huh-uh . Now , Mis-ter McBride '' , said Lord , and he laid a firmly restraining hand on the field boss's arm . It was strictly the deputy's game , but McBride had gone too far to throw in . Now , he could only play the last card in what was probably the world's coldest deck . He flung off Lord's hand and attempted to push past him , inadvertently shoving him into a storefront . It was practically the last move that McBride made of his own volition . Lord slugged him in the stomach , so hard that the organ almost pressed against his spine . Then , as he doubled , gasping , vomiting the breakfast he had so lately eaten , Lord straightened him with an uppercut . A rabbit punch redoubled him . And then there was a numbing blow to the heart , and another gut-flattening blow to the stomach But he couldn't keep up with them . No more could he defend himself against them . He seemed to be fighting not one man but a dozen . And he could no longer think of face-saving , of honor , but only of escape . Why , he's going to kill me , he thought wildly . I meant him no harm . I've given willful hurt to no man . I was just doing my job , just following orders , and for that he's going to kill me . Beat me to death in front of a hundred people . Somehow more terrible than the certainty that he was about to die was the knowledge that Lord would probably not suffer for it : the murder would go unpunished . He , McBride , would be cited as in the wrong , and he , Lord , would go scot-free , an officer who had only done his duty , though perhaps too energetically . McBride staggered into the street , flopped sprawling in the stinging dust . Fear-maddened , fleeing the lengthening shadow of death , he scrambled to his feet again . He couldn't see ; ; he was long past the point of coherent thinking . Dimly , he heard laughter , hoots of derision , but he could not read the racket properly . He could not grasp that Lord had withdrawn from the fight minutes ago , and that his leaden arms were flailing at nothing but the air . He hated them too much to understand -- the people of this isolated law-unto-itself world that was Lord's world . This , he was sure , was the way they would act ; ; laughing at a dying man , laughing as a man was beaten to death . And nothing would be done about it . Nothing unless Donna ! ! Donna , his young wife , the girl who was both daughter and wife to him . Donna was like he was . She lived by the rules , never compromising , never blinded or diverted by circumstance . And Donna would -- When he regained consciousness he was in Lord's house , in the office of Doctor Lord , the deputy's deceased father . The Brannon outfit -- known as the Slash-B because of its brand -- reached Hondo Creek before sundown . The herd was watered and then thrown onto a broad grass flat which was to be the first night's bedground . Two of the new hands , a Mexican named Jose Amado and a kid known only as Laredo , were picked for the first trick of riding night herd . The rest of the crew offsaddled their mounts and turned them into the remuda . They got tin cups of coffee from the big pot on the coosie's fire , rolled and lighted brown-paper cigarettes , lounged about . There was some idle talk , a listless discussion of this or that small happening during the day's drive . But they deliberately avoided the one subject that had them all curious : the failure of the boss's wife and son to join the outfit . It especially bothered the older hands . The cook , Mateo Garcia , had arrived there long before the herd . He'd started a fire and put coffee on , and now was busy at the work board of his chuck wagon . He was readying a batch of sourdough biscuits for the Dutch oven . Supper would be ready within the hour . The Maguire family was setting up a separate camp nearby . Billie had unhitched the mules from both Tom Brannon's and his father's wagon . Hank had gathered wood for a cookfire , and his wife was busy at it now . Conchita kept an eye on the twins and little Elena , trying to keep them from falling into the creek by which they persisted in playing . Conchita nagged at the younger children , attempting without success to keep her thoughts off Tom Brannon . Tom Brannon had caught up with the outfit shortly after the Maguires joined it , which had been at midday . He'd come alone , without his wife and child . He'd been in an angry mood : Conchita had thought his face almost ugly with the anger in him . She wondered what had taken place in town , between him and his wife . She wished that she could talk to her mother about it . Not that her mother knew what had happened , but they could speculate upon it . But her mother would rebuke her if she mentioned it , and say that it was none of her concern . `` Pat , get out of that creek ! ! You too , Sean ! ! Elena , you'll get mud all over your dress '' ! ! Even as she called to the children , Conchita let her gaze seek Tom Brannon . Tomas , she called him -- as the Mexican hands did . He was in earnest conversation with her father and the old vaquero , Luis Hernandez . Whatever they are talking about ? ? Conchita wondered . It bothered her that she probably would never know . Certainly , she wouldn't dare ask her father afterward . He would tell her not to pry into grownups' affairs -- as though she were a little kid like Elena ! ! At the moment , the three men were not saying much of anything . They were sitting on their heels , rider-fashion , over by the still empty calf wagon . Brannon was hunkered down with his broad back to the left rear wheel , with the other two facing him . He held a cigarette in his right hand . It was burning away , forgotten . His face was clouded with unhappiness . He'd told Hank Maguire and Luis Hernandez about his wife's refusal to come with him and about what he now intended to do . They were considering it gravely , neither seeming to like what he planned . Finally Hernandez said , `` I could offer you advice , Tomas , but you wouldn't heed it '' . `` Let's hear it , anyway '' . `` Wait a little while . Let Senora Brannon live in her father's house for a time . Give her time to miss you . Maybe she will then come to you . After all , you want the senora as much as you want the boy . You need her even more than you need him '' . `` She won't change her mind '' , Brannon said . `` John Clayton will see to that '' . `` But after a time away from you . '' `` A year , Luis ? ? Five ? ? Ten ? ? How long should I wait '' ? ? `` Maybe in a year , Tomas . '' `` In a year she'll like living in Clayton's house too much to come back to me '' , Brannon said flatly . `` And the boy will be too much under his influence by then . I've got to take Danny away from Clayton before I lose him altogether . Hell , in a year or five or ten , the boy will have forgotten me -- his own father '' ! ! `` But to take him and leave his mother behind is not good '' . `` In my place , you'd follow such advice as you give me '' ? ? Hernandez looked suddenly uncertain . `` That I can't answer , for I can't imagine something like this happening to me . Maybe I should withdraw my advice -- no '' ? ? Brannon looked at Hank Maguire . `` And you ? ? What would you do in my place '' ? ? Hank shook his head . `` I don't know , Tom . Like Luis , I can't see something like this happening to me . With Maria and me , there's never any problem . Where I go , she goes -- and the kids with us . You're going to need your woman . And the boy will need his mother . If you take the one , you'd better take both '' . Brannon shook his head . `` I won't force Beth to come against her will . But I'm going to have my son '' . They were silent for a little while , each looking glum . Finally Luis Hernandez said , `` What must be , must be . I am with you , of course , Tomas '' . And Hank Maguire added , `` So am I , Tom '' . `` All right '' , Brannon said , rising . `` We'll ride out as soon as we've had chuck '' . Brannon timed it so that they rode in an hour after nightfall . They had for cover both darkness and a summer storm . During much of the fifteen-mile ride they had watched a lurid display of lightning in the sky to the east . Later , they'd heard the rumble of thunder and then , just outside Rockfork , they ran into rain . Those who had slickers donned them . The others put on old coats or ducking jackets , whichever they carried behind their saddle cantles . There were seven of them , enough for a show of strength -- to run a bluff . It was to be nothing more than that . There was to be no gunplay . If the bluff failed and they ran into trouble , Brannon had told the others , they would withdraw -- and he would come after his son another time . He didn't want to put himself outside the law . With him were Hank Maguire , Luis Hernandez , and Luis's son Pedro . The Ramirez brothers were also along . The seventh man was Red Hogan , a wiry little puncher with a wild streak and a liking for hell-raising . They were all good men . It was dark early , because of the storm . Also because of the storm , the streets of Rockfork were deserted . Lighted windows glowed jewel-bright through the downpour . They reined in before the town marshal's office , a box-sized building on Main Street . A lamp burned inside , but Brannon , peering through the window , saw that the office was empty . He'd hoped to catch Jesse Macklin there . `` Probably just stepped out '' , he said . `` Maybe to have supper . Red , come along . The rest of you wait here '' . With Red Hogan , he rode to the Welcome Cafe . Hogan got down from the saddle and had a look inside . `` Not there '' , he said , getting back onto his horse . `` Maybe he's at the hotel '' . They rode to the Rockfork House , a little farther along the opposite side of the street . They reined in there , Brannon remaining in the saddle while Hogan went to look for Jesse Macklin in the hotel dining room . Brannon had no slicker . He'd put on his old brown corduroy coat and it was already soaked . But he felt no physical discomfort . He was only vaguely aware of the sluicing rain . He hardly noticed the blue-green flashes of lightning and the hard claps of thunder . Hogan reappeared , stopped on the hotel porch , lifted a hand in signal . Brannon dismounted and climbed the steps . `` He's finished eating '' , Hogan said . `` Sitting with a cup of coffee now . It shouldn't be long '' . It seemed long , at least to Tom Brannon . He and Hogan waited by the door , one to either side . Macklin was the third man to come out , and he came unhurriedly . He was puffing on a cigar , and he was turning up his coat collar against the rain . It was not until he moved across the porch that he became aware of them , and then it was too late . They closed in fast , kept him from reaching inside his coat for his gun . `` Just come along '' , Brannon told him . `` Don't start anything you can't finish '' . `` Now , listen '' -- Macklin began . `` We'll talk over at your office '' . `` Brannon , I warn you '' ! ! `` Let's go , Marshal '' , Brannon said , and took him by the arm . Hogan gripped the lawman's other arm . They escorted him down from the porch and through the rain to his office . The other five Slash-B men followed them inside , crowding the small room . His face was stiff with anger when they let go of his arms . He looked at each of them in turn , Brannon last of all . `` I'll remember you '' , he said . `` Every last one of you . As for you , Brannon '' -- `` Put your gun on the desk , Marshal '' . `` Now , hold on , damn it ; ; I won't '' -- Red Hogan's patience ran out . He lifted the skirt of Macklin's coat , took his gun from its holster , tossed it onto the desk . `` Too much fooling around '' , he said . `` Don't press your luck , badge-toter '' . Brannon said , `` Now the key to the lockup , Marshal '' . `` Key '' ? ? Macklin said . `` What for '' ? ? `` Can't you guess '' ? ? Brannon said . `` We're putting you where you won't come to harm . Come on -- the key . Get it out '' ! ! `` Damned if I will . Brannon , you've assaulted a law officer and '' -- They moved in on him , crowded him from all sides . No man laid a hand on him , but the threat of violence was there . His face took on a sudden pallor , became beaded with sweat , and he seemed to have trouble with his breathing . He held out a moment longer , then his nerve gave under the pressure . He swore , and said , `` All right . It's here in my pocket '' . `` Get it out '' , Brannon ordered . Then , as Macklin obeyed : `` Now let's go out back '' . Resignedly , Macklin turned to the back door . They followed him into the rain and across to the squat stone building fifty feet to the rear . The door of the lockup was of oak planks and banded with strap iron . It was secured by an oversized padlock . Macklin balked again , not wanting to unlock and open the door . They crowded him in that threatening way once more , forced him to give in . Once the door was open , they crowded him inside the dark building . He was uttering threats in a low but savage voice when they closed and padlocked the door . They returned to the street , mounted their horses , rode through the rain to the big house on Houston Street . Its windows glowed with lamplight . Deputy Marshal Luke Harper still stood guard on the veranda , a forlorn , scarecrowish figure in the murky dark . He came to the edge of the veranda , peered down at them with his hand on his gun . `` Don't try it '' , Brannon told him , dismounting and starting up the steps with his men following . `` Don't get yourself killed for something that doesn't concern you '' . He strode past the now frightened man , entered the house . Miguel and Arturo Ramirez remained on the veranda to keep Harper from interfering . The others followed Brannon inside . They trailed him across the wide hallway to the parlor , four roughly garbed and tough-looking men who probably had never before ventured into such a house . They brought to it all the odors that clung to men like themselves , that of their own sweat , of campfire smoke , of horses and cattle . They tracked mud on the oaken floor , on the carpet . Their presence fouled the elegance of that room . And their arrival caught John Clayton and Charles Ansley off guard . The author of the anonymous notes seemed to be all-knowing . For men who had left cattle alone after getting their first notices had received no second . But the day of the deadline came and passed , and the men who had scoffed at the warnings laughed with satisfaction . For , with a single exception , nothing had happened to them . The exception was an Iron Mountain settler named William Lewis . After walking out to his corral that morning , he'd been amazed to see the dust puff up in front of his feet . A split second later , the distant crack of a rifle had sounded . He'd mounted up immediately and raced with a revolver ready toward the spot from which he'd estimated the shot had come . But he had found all of the thickets and points of cover deserted . There had been no sign of a rifleman and no track or trace to show that anyone had been near . Lewis was a man who had made a full-time job of cow stealing . He hadn't even pretended to be farming his spread . His land had never been plowed . He had done his rustling openly and boasted about it . He had received both first and second anonymous notices , and each time he had accused his neighbors of writing them . He had cursed at them and threatened them . He was a man , those neighbors testified later , who didn't have a friend in the world . William Lewis made the rounds of all who lived near him again , that August morning after a bullet landed at his feet , and once more he accused and threatened everyone . `` I'll be ready next time '' ! ! He raged . `` I'll be shootin' right back '' . He had his chance the very next morning , for exactly the same thing happened again . This time Lewis had his own rifle in his hands , and he threw some answering fire back at the mysterious far-off shot , then spent most of the day searching out the area . He found nothing , but he still refused to give up and move out . `` Just let me meet up with that damned bushwhackin' coward face-to-face '' ! ! He exploded . `` That's all I ask '' ! ! He never got that chance . For the unseen , ghostlike rifleman aimed a little higher the third time . A bullet smashed directly into the center of William Lewis' chest . He slumped against a log fence rail , then tried to lift himself . Two more shots followed in quick succession , dropping him limp and huddled on the ground . An inquest was held , and after a good deal of testimony about the anonymous notes , the county coroner estimated that the shooting had been done from a distance of 300 yards . Rumors of the offer Tom Horn had made at the Stockgrowers' Association meeting had leaked out by then , and as a grand jury investigation of the murder got underway , the prosecuting attorney , a Colonel Baird , ordered that the tall stock detective be summoned for questioning . It took some time to locate Horn . He was finally found in the Bates Hole region of Natrona County , two counties away . Prosecutor Baird immediately assumed he was hiding out there after the shooting and began preparing an indictment . But that indictment was never made . For Tom Horn , it turned out , had a number of rancher and cowboy witnesses ready and willing to swear with straight faces that he had been in Bates Hole the day of the killing . The former scout's alibi couldn't be shaken . The authorities had to release him . He immediately rode on to Cheyenne , threw a ten-day drinking spree and dropped some very strong hints among friends . `` Dead center at three hundred yards , that coroner said '' ! ! He'd grin . `` Three shots in that fella 'fore he hit the ground ! ! You reckon there's two men in this state can shoot like that '' ? ? Publicly , he denied everything . Privately , he created and magnified an image of himself as a hired assassin . For a blood-chilling ring of terror to the very sound of his name was the tool he needed for the job he'd promised to do . Tom Horn was soon back at work , giving his secret employers their money's worth . A good many beef-hungry settlers were accepting the death of William Lewis as proof that the warning notes were not idle threats . The company herds were being raided less often , and cabins and soddies all over the range were standing deserted . But there were other homesteaders who passed the Lewis murder off as a personal grudge killing , the work of one of his neighbors . The rustling problem was by no means solved . Even in the very area where the shooting had been done , cattle were still disappearing . For less than a dozen miles from the unplowed land of the dead man lived another settler who had ignored the warnings that his existence might be foreclosed on -- a blatant and defiant rustler named Fred Powell . `` Fred was mighty crude about the way he took in cattle '' his own hired man , Andy Ross , mentioned later . `` Everyone knew it , but he sort of acted like he didn't care who knew it -- even after them notes came , even after he'd heard about Lewis , even after he'd been shot at a couple o' times hisself '' ! ! On the morning of September 10 , 1895 , Powell and Ross rose at dawn and began their day's work . Haying time was close at hand , and they needed some strong branches to repair a hay rack . Harnessing a team to a buckboard , they drove out to a willow-lined creek about a half-mile off , then climbed down and began chopping . Andy Ross had just started swinging an ax at his second willow when the distant blast of a rifle sounded . He looked around in surprise , then noticed that Fred Powell was clutching his chest . The hired man ran over to help his boss . `` My God , I'm shot '' ! ! Powell gasped . And he collapsed and died instantly . Ross had no intention of searching for the assassin . He heaved the dead man onto the buckboard , yelled and lashed at the team and got out of there fast . But he brought back the sheriff and several deputies , and to the lawmen the entire affair seemed a repetition of the Lewis killing . A detailed scouring of the entire area revealed nothing beyond a ledge of rocks that might have been the rifleman's hiding place . There were no tracks of either hoofs or boots . Not even an empty cartridge case could be found . Once again , Tom Horn was the first and most likely suspect , and he was brought in for questioning immediately . Once again , he shook his head , kept his face expressionless and his voice very calm , and had a strongly supported alibi ready . Later , riding in for some lusty enjoyment of the liquor and professional ladies of Cheyenne , he laid claim to the killing with the vague insinuations he made . `` Exterminatin' cow thieves is just a business proposition with me '' , he'd blandly announce . `` And I sort o' got a corner on the market '' . `` Tom '' , a friend asked him once , `` how come you bushwhacked them rustlers ? ? They wouldn't o' stood no chance with you in a plain , straight-out shoot-down '' . He had lots of friends , then as always . Even as he became widely known as a professional killer , nearly every cowboy and rancher in Wyoming seemed proud to call him a friend . No man's name brought more cheers when it was announced in a rodeo . `` Well '' , he explained , `` s'posin' you was a nester swingin' the long rope ? ? Which would you be most scairt of -- a dry-gulchin' or a shoot-down '' ? ? `` Yeah , I can see that '' , the friend was forced to agree . `` But well , it just don't seem sportin' somehow '' ! ! `` Sportin' '' ! ! The tall sunburnt rustler-hunter stared in amazement . `` Sportin' '' ! ! He echoed again in soft wonder . `` I seen a lot o' things in my time . I found a trooper once the Apache had spread-eagled on an ant hill , and another time we ran across some teamsters they'd caught , tied upside down on their own wagon wheels over little fires until their brains was exploded right out o' their skulls . I heard o' Texas cattlemen wrappin' a cow thief up in green hides and lettin' the sun shrink 'em and squeeze him to death . But there's one thing I never seen or heard of , one thing I just don't think there is , and that's a sportin' way o' killin' a man '' ! ! After the first two murders , the warning notes were rarely ignored . The lesson had been learned . The examples were plain . When Fred Powell's brother-in-law , Charlie Keane , moved into the dead man's home , the anonymous letter writer took no chances on Charlie taking up where Fred had left off and wasted no time on a first notice : If you don't leave this country within 3 days , your life will be taken the same as Powell's was . This was the message found tacked to the cabin door . Keane left , within three days . All through Albany and Laramie counties , other men were doing the same . Houses of settlers who'd treated the company herds as a natural resource , free for the taking , were sitting empty , with weeds growing high in their yards . The small half-heartedly tended fields of men who'd spent more time rustling cattle than farming were lying fallow . No cow thief could count on a jury of his sympathetic peers to free him any longer . Jury , judge and executioner were riding the range in the form of a single unknown figure that could materialize anywhere , at any time , to dispense an ancient brand of justice the men of the new West had believed long outdated . For three straight years , Tom Horn patrolled the southern Wyoming pastures , and how many men he killed after Lewis and Powell ( if he killed Lewis and Powell ) will never be known . It is possible , although highly doubtful , that he killed none at all but merely let his reputation work for him by privately claiming every unsolved murder in the state . It is also possible , but equally doubtful , that he actually shot down the hundreds of men with which his legend credits him . For that legend was growing explosively , Rumor was insisting he received a price of $600 a man . ( The best evidence is that he received a monthly wage of about $125 , very good money in an era when top hands worked for $30 and found . ) Rumor had it he slipped two small rocks under each victim's head as a sort of trademark . ( A detailed search of old coroner's reports fails to substantiate this in the slightest . ) One thing was certain -- his method was effective , so effective that after a time even the warning notices were often unnecessary . The mere fact that the tall figure with the rifle and field glasses had been seen riding that way was enough to frighten three rustling homesteaders out of the Upper Laramie country in a single week . `` My reputation's my stock in trade '' , Tom mentioned more than once . He evidently couldn't foresee that it might be his downfall in the end . He had made himself the personification of the Devil to the homesteaders . But to the cattlemen who had been facing bankruptcy from rustling losses and to the cowboys who had been faced with lay-offs a few years earlier , he was becoming a vastly different type of legendary figure . Such ranchers as Coble and Clay and the Bosler brothers carried him on their books as a cowhand even while he was receiving a much larger salary from parties unknown . He made their spreads his headquarters , and he helped out in their roundups . In the cow camps , Tom Horn was regarded as a hero , as the same kind of champion he was when he entered and invariably won the local rodeos . The hands and their bosses saw him as a lone knight of the range , waging a dedicated crusade against a lawless new society that was threatening a beloved way of life . The wailing , guitar-strumming minstrels of the cattle kingdom made up songs about him . By 1898 , rustling losses had been driven down to the lowest level ever seen in Wyoming . When several minutes had passed and Curt hadn't emerged from the livery stable , Brenner reentered the hotel and faced Summers across the counter . `` I have a little job for you , Charlie . I'm sure you won't mind doing me a small favor '' . Brenner's voice was oily , but Summers wasn't fooled . He moistened his lips uneasily . `` What is it you want me to do , Mr. Brenner '' ? ? Brenner shrugged carelessly . `` It's very simple . I just want you to take a message to Diane Molinari . Tell her to come here to the hotel '' . Vastly relieved , Summers nodded and started toward the door . `` One thing , Summers '' , Brenner said . `` You're not to mention my name . Tell her Curt Adams wants to see her '' . Summers pulled up short , and turned around . `` I don't know , Mr. Brenner '' , he said haltingly , beginning to get an inkling of Brenner's plans . `` It doesn't seem quite right , telling her a thing like that . Couldn't I just '' -- His voice trailed off into silence . Brenner continued to smile , but his eyes were cold . He turned and looked around at the lobby as though seeing things he hadn't before noticed . `` You know , Summers '' , he said thoughtfully . `` Eagle's Nest ought to have a fire company . If someone were to drop a match in here , this place would go up like a haystack '' . He started toward the stairway , then turned to add , `` Tell her to come to Adams's room , that Adams is in trouble . Tell her to hurry '' . `` Yes sir '' . His face pale , Summers headed for the street . Curt's visit to the livery stable had been merely a precaution in case anyone should be watching . He paused only long enough to ascertain that Jess's buckskin was still missing and that his own gray was all right , then climbed through a back window and dropped to the ground outside . The fact that Jess's horse had not been returned to its stall could indicate that Diane's information had been wrong , but Curt didn't interpret it this way . A man like Jess would want to have a ready means of escape in case it was needed . Probably his horse would be close to where he was hiding . From the back of the barn it was a simple matter to reach Black's house without using the street . Curt approached the place cautiously , and watched it several minutes from the protection of a grove of trees . There was a light in Black's front room , but drawn curtains prevented any view of the interior . Curt circled the house and located a barn out back . He could hear horses moving around inside , and nothing else . There was no lock on the door , only an iron hook which he unfastened . He opened the door and went in , pulling it shut behind him . Again he stood in the darkness listening , but there was only the scrape of a shod hoof on a plank floor . He moved ahead carefully , his left hand in front of him , and came to a wooden partition . Horse smell was very strong , and he could hear the crunch of grain being ground between strong jaws . He found a match in his pocket and lit it . There were two horses in the barn , a sway-backed dun and Jess Crouch's buckskin . Curt snuffed out the match . It was certain now that Jess was in the house , but also , presumably , was Stacey Black . Curt wanted to get Jess alone , without interference from anyone , even as spineless a person as the store owner . He studied the problem for a few seconds and thought of a means by which it might be solved . Reaching across the side of the stall , he slapped the buckskin on the rump . The startled animal let out a terrified squeal and thrashed around in the stall . As Curt had hoped , the house door banged open . He slapped the buckskin again and it kicked wildly , its hoofs rattling the side of the stall . Curt moved over beside the door and waited . Presently he heard footsteps crossing the yard , and Jess's smothered curses . The door swung open , and Jess said sourly , `` What the hell's the matter with you ? ? '' The horse continued to snort . Curt doubted that any animal belonging to Jess would find much reassurance in its owner's voice . Jess cursed again , and entered the barn . A match flared , and he reached above his head to light a lantern which hung from a wire loop . As he crossed to the side of the stall , Curt drew his gun and clicked back the hammer . `` Before you try anything '' , he said . `` Remember what happened to Gruller '' . Jess caught his breath in surprise . He started to reach for his gun , but apparently thought better of it . `` That's the stuff '' , Curt said . `` Just hold it that way '' . He reached out to pull the door shut and fasten it with a sliding bolt . `` You and I have a little talking to do , Jess . You won't be needing this '' . He moved up and lifted Jess's pistol out of its holster . `` Damn you , Adams '' -- Jess was beginning to recover from his initial shock . `` We ain't got nothing to talk about . If I don't come back in the house , Breed's going to '' -- `` Your trigger-happy brother isn't in the house . About now he's probably having supper . That long ride the four of you took must've given him a good appetite . Now turn around so I can see your face '' . Jess turned . There was raw fury in his eyes , and the veins of his neck were swollen . `` You're about as dumb as they come , Adams . I don't know what you're up to , but when Brenner '' -- `` You can forget about Brenner , too '' , Curt said . `` It's Ben Arbuckle we're going to talk about '' . `` Arbuckle '' ? ? Jess stiffened . `` I don't know nothin' about him '' . `` No ? ? I suppose you don't know anything about a piece of two-by-four , either ; ; one with blood all over it , Arbuckle's blood '' . Curt's fingers put a little more pressure on the trigger of his gun . `` So help me , Crouch , I'd like to kill you where you stand , but , before I do , I'm going to hear you admit killing him . Now start talking . Who told you to do it ? ? Was it Dutch Brenner '' ? ? Curt was holding Jess's gun in his left hand . He drew back his arm to slash the gunbarrel across Jess's face , but didn't finish the motion . Pistol-whipping an unarmed man might come easy to someone like Jess , but Curt couldn't bring himself to do it . Apparently sensing this , and realizing that it gave him an advantage , Jess became bold . `` Having all the guns makes you a big man , don't it , Adams ? ? If we was both armed , you wouldn't talk so tough '' . `` No '' ? ? Curt reached out and dropped Jess's pistol back into the holster . He retreated a step and holstered his own . `` All right , Crouch ; ; we're on even terms . Now draw '' ! ! Sweat bubbled out on Jess's swarthy face . The fingers of his right hand twisted into a claw , but he didn't reach for the gun . Curt , angry enough to be a little reckless , raised his hands shoulder high . `` Does this make it any easier , coward '' ? ? `` I ain't drawin' against you '' , Jess said thickly . `` I heard how you outdrew Chico . I ain't a gunslinger '' . `` No . You're the kind of bastard who sneaks up on a man from behind and hits him with a club . I just wanted to hear you say so '' . Jess stared at him without answering and let his hands fall to his sides . He had found Curt's weakness , or what to Jess was a weakness , and was smart enough to take advantage of it . Somewhere in the distance , a woman screamed . Curt was too involved in his own problems to pay much attention . He had to make Jess talk , and he had to do it before Stacey Black got curious and came to investigate . Once more he lifted Jess's gun from its holster , only this time he tossed it into the stall with the frightened buckskin . He dropped his own beside it . `` We'll do it another way , then '' , he said harshly . Jess's coarse features twisted in a surprised grin which was smashed out of shape by Curt's fist . With a roar of pain and fury Jess made his attack . Curt managed to duck beneath the man's flailing fist , and drove home a solid left to Jess's mid-section . It was like hitting a sack of salt . Pain shot up Curt's arm clear to the shoulder , but Jess seemed hardly aware that he had been hit . He slammed into the wall , bounced back , and caught Curt with a roundhouse right which sent him spinning . An inch lower and it would have knocked him out . As it was , his vision blurred and for a moment he was unable to move . When his eyes began to focus , he saw Jess charging at him with a pitchfork . Curt twisted to one side , and the tines of the fork bit into the floor . Jess wasted a few seconds trying to yank them loose . It gave Curt time to stagger to his feet . The tines broke off under Jess's twisting , and he swung the handle in an attempt to knock Curt's brains out . His aim was hurried ; ; so the pitchfork whistled over Curt's head . By now Curt was seeing clearly again . He stepped inside Jess's guard and landed two blows to the big man's belly , putting everything he had behind them . They made Jess double over . When his head came down , Curt grabbed him by the hair and catapulted him head first into the wall . The building shook , setting the lantern to swaying , and the buckskin to pitching again . Even Black's old crowbait began to snort , and from the house Black yelled , `` Jess ! ! What's going on out there '' ? ? Jess didn't seem too sure himself . He lurched drunkenly to his feet , lowered his head , and took one step away from the wall . Curt caught him flush on the nose with a blow which started at the floor . Jess had had enough . Blood gushed from his nose , and he backed off as rapidly as he could , stumbling over his own feet in his frantic haste to get away from Curt's fists . Curt was in almost as bad shape , but he wouldn't quit . He backed Jess into a corner , grabbed a handful of the man's shirtfront , and drew back his right fist . `` Tell me about Arbuckle ! ! You killed him , didn't you '' ? ? `` It was Brenner's idea '' , Jess mumbled , dabbing at his nose . `` He found out about you and Arbuckle talking . He wanted to show the town what happened to anyone who tried to start trouble '' . `` You mean anyone who stood up for his rights '' , Curt said . He let go of the shirt , and Jess slumped to the floor . Turning his back , Curt crossed to the stall , reached over to untie the buckskin's halter rope , and waved his hand in the animal's face . The buckskin bolted out of the stall . Curt moved in and picked up his gun . He shook loose straw out of the action , and placed the gun in his holster . Leaving Jess's where it lay , he left the stall . `` Get up , Crouch . We're going someplace '' . Jess painfully got to his feet as someone rattled the door . `` Who's in there '' ? ? Black called fearfully . Curt opened the door , grabbed Black by the shoulder , and pulled him into the barn . `` You're staying right here for a while . This dirty coward just admitted killing Arbuckle . I'm going to let him tell it to somebody else '' . He shoved Black toward the stall , and pointed his pistol at Jess . `` Get out of here . You're coming along peacefully , or I'll put a bullet in your leg '' . Jess stumbled through the door . Curt followed , reaching behind him to shut the door and hook it . Black would have little trouble getting out , but it might delay him a few minutes . `` Where're you takin' me '' ? ? Jess asked worriedly . `` We're going to Marshal Woods's house . Maybe if the marshal hears this himself , it'll make a difference . Somebody in this town must still have some backbone '' . Over his shoulder he could see Max's loose grin and the Burnsides' glowering faces . `` Honey '' , he whispered . `` Soon as we send them on their way and make camp , let's you and me go for a walk down by the Snake -- all by ourselves '' . `` Sally '' , admonished her mother , `` you've got all evening to visit with Dan . His wounds need dressing now '' . Mrs. Jackson's words recalled Dan to his lack of fitness for courting . What a spectacle he was , caked with dirt and sweat and blood , filthy as a pig and naked as an Indian , kissing the finest , the sweetest , the bravest , and absolutely the prettiest girl in this whole wonderful world . He released her reluctantly for her enthusiastic reunion with Old Hap . `` Got a lot to tend to , but I'll get back quick as I can '' , he assured her . Dan could hear Clayton Burnside and Eben Jackson summing up their final reckoning for rental on the oxen . Jackson was doing most of the talking . So long as Sally's pa was coming out best on the haggle , Dan didn't feel the need of putting in his two-bits' worth . Soon as the Burnsides moved on , he'd lead Rex down by the river ; ; there he could shave and scrub himself up for the evening . Damn it , he thought bitterly , picking up his shirt and staring at the fresh bullet hole in the sleeve . If I hadn't got Nate stopped when I did , my duds'd all be shot plumb to hell ! ! He stooped , picked up his ruined hat , and pursed his lips thoughtfully . From the way the wound in his head was itching , Dan knew that it would heal . But his only hat was something else again . `` Nate ! ! Nate '' ! ! He shouted . The Burnsides , now ready to roll , were purposefully deaf to his cry . `` Nate '' ! ! He bellowed to the retreating back directly in front of him . `` I ain't going to fight you no more '' . Nate turned his head , attempting to speak in a soothing voice . `` I know you ain't '' ! ! Dan affirmed , feeling ten feet tall . He moved in close , jerked the handsome , broad-brimmed beaver hat from Nate's head and clamped it on his own . `` Here's a present for you '' , he said , shoving his bullet-riddled hat down over Nate's purpling forehead . `` Me and you's trading hats so's you'll have something permanent to remember me by '' ! ! Sally left her choring to stand beside Dan . Slipping her hand in his , they silently watched the Burnsides make the bend in the road and disappear from sight . Much as they had to look forward to , they didn't begrudge a moment of the time they spent seeing them go . At first Matilda could not believe her own eyes . She had spent too many hours looking ahead , hoping and longing to catch even a glimpse of Dan and finding nothing but emptiness . And now she could see him , looking uncommon handsome , standing there beside Sally Jackson and her folks in front of their trail-worn wagon . Seeing them waiting there at the foot of Emigrant Rock was so overwhelming that , for a good minute after they rounded the bend and started down the grade leading toward them , Matilda could not speak at all . Then , with a glory that almost wiped out the deep , downward sags in her careworn face , Matilda leaned over the wheel and shouted to Hez , who was stumbling along in the heat and the dust on the opposite side of the wagon `` Pa ! ! Pa ! ! I can see Dan . And he's with the Jacksons '' ! ! `` What about Burnsides '' ? ? Hez asked , who still believed they'd have them to lick . `` They ain't even in sight '' ! ! She replied . By then Hez could see for himself , and so could the others . Soon they were all shouting greetings , exchanging smiles , and rejoicing to think that they were all back together again . But even a reunion as joyous as this one did not make a break in the routines of the day . Nor could they stop and find out about all that had happened until they made circle , tended the cattle , tethered the horses , gathered fuel , carried water , and started their cooking fires . Then , and only then , with the Jacksons and Dan as their true guests of honor , did the Harrows take time to catch up on the news . No sooner did they hear of Dan's injury than both Gran and Matilda went into immediate action . The wound in his scalp was examined , pronounced healing , and well doctored with simples , before they dished up the victuals . From then on , in keeping with the traditions they had followed since childhood , the whole group settled down to relish their food . Even Sally , in spite of her gaiety and obvious welcome , followed the old taboo of `` quitting the gab when wearing the nosebag '' . After their supper , the evening turned into a regular `` Hoe-Down '' . Only , they carefully substituted old country folk dances for the Virginia Reels and square dances that were so popular among more worldly trains in the great westward migration . But with Bill O'Connor on the fiddle , and Gran Harrow exuberantly shouting `` Glory Be '' and `` Hallelujah '' above their united chant of the lilting old ballads , they played their quaint folk games with all the fervor and abandon of a real celebration . `` Golly '' , Rod exclaimed to Harmony as he dutifully stood by her side among the ringed spectators , `` don't that fiddle make you wish the Bible didn't say us Baptists can't dance '' ? ? `` Nor Methodists , neither '' , she replied . `` Not that it matters to me , being this far along '' . Rod gave her a warm pat on the shoulder before he replied . `` Come spring , you'll be kicking up your heels and feeling coltish again too , gal '' . At these words of sympathy and understanding , Harmony said generously , `` I don't mind setting here along with Gran while you go out and join in the games '' . Rod shifted his eager eyes from the milling group out in the circle long enough to reply , `` I ain't much of a hand for Dare-Base and Farmer-in-the-Dell , but I'd sure like to get in on the handhold and wrestles '' . He looked down at his big hands and slowly flexed his long fingers . `` Don't reckon there's nobody out there , 'cept maybe Dan , who can outgrip me , Harmony '' . With Rod on his way and Matilda visiting with Mrs. Jackson while they searched out familiar names on the face of the cliff , Harmony settled on the edge of the grub box , to ease the pressure of her swollen body on her bone-weary legs , and worried about all that might have happened to Sally . And she was deeply thankful that she could see her now , out there in the midst of a gay , youthful circle , skipping and singing , `` Farmer in the dell , Farmer in the dell , Heigh-ho the dairy-oh , the farmer in the dell '' . At the sight of Sally's happy face and carefree expression , Harmony's dark , brooding eyes quickly brightened with unshed tears . She was glad , completely and unselfishly glad , to see that things were working out the right way for both Sally and Dan . And she really tried to go a step further and say she hoped they'd be just as right as they now were for her and for Rod . But she couldn't , not yet . Not with the memory of her folks and the lost Conestoga still holding her close . Out in the center of the circle the farmer , who was Dan , wasted no time when they came to the line , `` The farmer choose his wife '' . With a swift swoop of his big arms , he grabbed Sally out of the circle surrounding him , and then kissed her soundly before setting her down so she could stand by his side while they jointly chose the rest of their `` outfit '' . Soon the child , the dog , the cat and even the cheese , all joined them out there in the circle . By now Harmony could see that most of the adults in the train were winded and resting , or else siphoned off from the games by the challenging lure of the great cliff towering above them . No matter how many registry rocks they came to on this journey , each one exerted its own appeal . Even strange names seemed to make them feel closer to some kind of civilization when stumbled across out here in this wilderness . Already a few hardy folk from their own train were zealously chipping away at the register rocks , leaving their own records along with those made by the earlier trains . Soon she saw Rod and Hez moving over to join them . No sooner were they through and the guards posted , than the whole camp turned in for a night of sound sleep . For Matilda , it was the first she had known in many a night . Even the knowledge that she was losing another boy , as a mother always does when a marriage is made , did not prevent her from having the first carefree , dreamless sleep that she had known since they dropped down the canyon and into Bear Valley , way , way back there when they were crossing those other mountains . Next morning , they moved on again . `` My souls' a-gracious '' ! ! Gran Harrow exclaimed , watching their rippling muscles as Rod and Dan swung her up into the load . `` A body would swear I floated right up here on a cloud '' ! ! Rod and Dan released their holds on the arms of her hickory rocker and exchanged embarrassed grins . `` Shucks , Gran '' , they said almost in unison . `` That wasn't nothing at all '' ! ! Leaning forward in her chair , Gran nearsightedly scrutinized Dan's face . `` How's Sally like rubbin' agin that thar little ticklebrush ye're a-raising '' ? ? `` Quit ragging him , Gran '' , Rod protested . `` I ain't ragging him '' ! ! Gran peered again at the week-old blond mustache shadowing Dan's upper lip . `` But honest-to-Betsy , I've seed more hair than that on a piece o' bacon '' . The two tall brothers waited silently while their mother handed Gran her cold snack and water jug , placed the chamber pot beside her feet , and returned to her place at the front of the wagon with Alice . `` Rheumatics worse , Pa '' ? ? Dan asked Hez , who had limped back from his team to hold the notched-stick chair braces in place while his boys swung up the tailgate and tied it tight at the ends . `` My right leg's stiff as a board this morning '' , he replied . `` But the sun'll fry it out'n me onct we git to rolling '' . The three men stepped out to the side to wait for Captain Clemens' signal . Hez looked up at the high face of Emigrant Rock , official signboard for the Raft River turnoff , and gloated , `` Seems funny that them Burnsides never took time to leave their John-Henry up thar '' . `` Wonder what made them hurry so '' , Rod drawled , giving Dan a sly wink . Dan grinned , and changed the subject . `` From now on , Sally and me and her folks aim to give you our turn when it comes up and fall in behind you and Rod's outfit '' . `` Ain't no sense you eating our dust '' , Rod protested . `` Sally and her ma want to trade off on account of Harmony being so far along '' , Dan explained . `` Jackson recruited his critters , and him and me fixed up his wagon while we was waiting for you to catch up . He's got the tightest running gear in the train now . Besides , 'tain't no more'n right for me to follow with my black oxen , so's I can unhook and pull up fast if either of you get in a pinch '' . Captain Clemens' signal shot sent the men hurrying to their waiting teams . `` Reckon ye're right , Dan '' , Hez called back over his shoulder . `` I'll shore be needing ye both on the pull out o' the canyon '' . Rod looked apprehensively ahead at the narrowing , precipice-walled gorge . `` We'll double teams zigzagging up the mountain , Harmony '' , he spoke reassuringly , concerned by the pinched look around her mouth . `` Like enough we'll all be up on top by sundown '' . Out of the corner of his eye , he could see his father's wheels beginning to turn . Before Harmony had a chance to reply , Rod cracked his long whip over his thin oxen's backs . While no larger than Dutch Springs , this mining supply town had the appearance of being far busier and more prosperous . Men crowded the streets and freight rigs and teams were moving about . Although they were forced to maintain a sharper watch , this activity enabled them to ride in and rack their broncs without any particular attention being paid them . `` Gyp'll be holdin' forth in some bar if he's here at all '' , Cobb declared , glancing along the street as they stretched their legs . There were no less than six or seven saloons in Ganado , not counting the lower class dives , all vying for the trade of celebrating miners and teamsters . Pat only nodded . `` Take one side of the street , and I'll take the other '' , he proposed . `` If you spot Carmer give a yell before you move in '' . Cobb's assent was tight . `` You do the same . It's all I ask , Stevens '' . Separating , they took different sides of the main drag and systematically combed the bars . Russ visited two places without result and his blood pressure was down to zero . Suddenly it seemed to him insane that they might hope to locate Gyp Carmer so casually , even were he to prove the thief . He tramped out of the Miners Rest with his hopes plummeting , and headed doggedly for the Palace Saloon , the last place of any consequence on this side of the street . The Palace was an elaborate establishment , built practically on stilts in front , with long flights of wooden steps running up to the porch . Behind its ornate facade the notorious dive clung like a bird's nest to the rocky ribs of the canyonside . Russ ran up the steps quickly to the plank porch . The front windows of the place were long and narrow , reaching nearly to the floor and affording an unusually good view of the interior . Heading for the batwings , Cobb glanced perfunctorily through the nearest window , and suddenly dodged aside . Nerves tight as a bowstring , he paused to gather his wits . Against all expectation , Carmer was inside , clearly enjoying himself to the hilt and already so tipsy that it seemed unlikely he was bothering to note anything or anyone about him . Fierce anger surged through Russ . He fought down the impulse to rush in and collar the vicious puncher on the spot . Reaching the porch rail beyond view of the bar windows , he feverishly scanned the busy street below . Stevens was nowhere in sight . Muffling an exclamation , Russ sprang to the nearest steps and ran down . As luck had it , he had not gone twenty feet in the street before Pat appeared . `` What luck , Cobb '' ? ? He said swiftly . Russ pointed upward . `` He's there '' , he got out tersely , curbing his rising excitement . Hitching his cartridge belt around , Pat glanced upward briefly at the Palace and started that way with Cobb at his side . Climbing the steps steadily , they reached the top and headed for the door . Pat pushed through first . Forced behind him momentarily , Russ followed at once and halted two steps inside . His eyes widened . While five minutes ago the place had presented a scene of easy revelry , with Gyp Carmer a prominent figure , it was now as somnolent and dull as the day before payday . Carmer himself was nowhere to be seen . A man knocked the roulette ball about idly in its track , and another dozed at one of the card tables . Two men murmured with their heads together at the end of the bar , while the sleek-headed bartender absently polished a glass . Looking the setup over , Stevens started coolly for the rear of the place . `` Where yuh goin' '' ? ? It was the barkeep . Halting , Pat turned to survey him deliberately . He did not reply , going on toward the back . Less assured than the tall , wide-shouldered man in the lead , Cobb followed alertly , a hand on his gun butt . The bartender measured this situation with heavy eyes and decided he wanted no part of it . He said no more . A hall opened in back of the bar , running toward an ell . Pat moved into it . Small rooms , probably for cards , opened off on either side . All the doors were open at this hour except one , and it was toward this that Stevens made his way with Russ close at his shoulder . The door was locked . A single kick made it spring open , shuddering . Pat saw Gyp Carmer staggering forward , a half-filled bottle upraised as if to strike . Russ sprang through to bat it nimbly aside . With a bellow Carmer lunged at him . But he was more than half-drunk , and his faculties were dulled . Cobb unleashed a single powerful jab that sent Gyp reeling wildly and crashing down with a whining groan . He started to struggle up , heaving desperately . Russ gave him a brutal thrust that tumbled him over flat on his stomach . Kneeling , Cobb planted a sturdy knee in the small of his back , holding him pinned . `` Okay , Stevens . I've drawn his fangs '' , he snapped . `` Go through his pockets , will you ? ? If we have to we'll take him apart and see what he's made of '' ! ! Complying methodically , Pat pulled pocket after pocket inside out without finding a thing . Cobb watched this with hunted eyes , his desperate hope waning by the moment . Stevens was grunting over the last empty pocket when Russ abruptly rose and lunged toward Carmer's hat , which had tumbled half-a-dozen feet away when he first fell . Cobb got it . Straightening up , his eyes ablaze , he held out the battered Stetson . `` Look at this '' ! ! Inside the crown , stuffed behind the stained sweatband , could be seen thin , crumpled wads of currency . Carmer's ingenious cache for his loot had been found . `` By golly , Stevens ! ! You were right '' , Russ exclaimed , tearing the loose bills out of Carmer's hat . `` That is , if we can be sure this is Colcord's money '' -- Pat grunted . `` Where else would he get it ? ? Count what you've got there , Cobb . We can soon tell '' . Russ ran through the bills and named an amount it was highly unlikely any cowpuncher would come by honestly . Pat nodded . `` It's within a hundred of what Crip had '' , he declared . `` We know Penny spent some -- and Carmer must have dropped a few dollars getting that load on '' . Handing the money over , Russ wiped his hands on his pants-legs as if ridding himself of something unclean . His glance at Gyp Carmer was disdainful . `` Shall we get out of here '' ? ? Leaving the card room , they moved back through the Palace the way they had come . Glowering looks met them in the bar , but there was no attempt to halt them . Pausing in the outside door to glance behind him , Pat looked his unspoken warning and stepped out . He and Cobb clattered down the high steps to the street . Neither spoke till they reached their horses . Pat paused there , looking across at the young fellow . It'll be a pleasure for you to return this money to Colcord and tell him about it , Russ '' . He started to return it . To his faint surprise Russ held up his hand . `` Not me '' , he ruled decidedly . I've had enough . It was you that tracked it down anyway , Stevens '' , he pursued strictly . `` I'll shove along home '' . `` Whatever you say '' . Pat swung into the saddle , yet still he delayed , his brows puckered . `` You owe it to Penny to give her a chance to explain that she was defending you , really '' , he observed mildly . `` Old Crip wasn't '' , retorted Cobb tartly . `` He'll know when you tell him . But I want this to sink in awhile . Then maybe next time he won't be so quick on the trigger '' . `` Pat had never pretended to give advice in such affairs . `` You're the doctor '' , he returned with a smile . `` But I still think Penny's an awful nice girl , Russ '' -- `` You don't have to tell me '' , flashed Cobb . Giving the other a dark look , he hauled his bronc around and trotted down off the street . Pat let him go , following more leisurely . At the first restaurant he sensibly pulled up to go in for his dinner , and as a consequence did not see Cobb strike the open range at the mouth of the canyon and head straight across the swells for Antler . The truth was , the puncher was both bewildered and dismayed by his own mixed luck . `` Penny's always glad to see me over there '' , he mused bleakly . Yet had he not visited the girl at Saw Buck he would never have been involved in this latest tangle . Over and above that , however , was his growing suspicion of Chuck Stober's part in recent events . `` Gyp Carmer couldn't have known about Colcord's money unless he was told -- and who else would have told him '' ? ? He asked himself . `` It's the second time War Ax hands made a play for that money . How much of an accident could that be '' ? ? Nearing home , he jerked to attention at the distant crack of a gun . In town no one paid much attention to an occasional shot ; ; but on the range gunfire had a meaning . Hauling up , Russ listened carefully . Two minutes later it came again -- a double explosion , followed by a third , sounding more distant . As near as Cobb could determine the shots came from the direction of the Antler ranch house . He tightened up in a twinkling . So far as he knew , only his father could be there . What did it mean ? ? Clapping spurs to the bronc he set off at a sharp canter , with growing alarm . His first glimpse of the ranch house across the brushy swells told him nothing . Still a quarter-mile away , the fresh clap of guns only served to increase his speed . Setting a course straight for the house , he was covering ground fast when an angry bee buzzed past close to his face . When it was followed by a second , whining even closer , Cobb swerved sharply aside into a depression . He knew now what he was up against . Whoever was out there hiding in the brushy cover was besieging the Antler house and , having spotted his approach , was determined to drive him off before he could get into the fight . Cursing himself for having ridden out the last few days without a rifle in his saddle boot , Russ drew his Colt and examined it briefly . If he wondered whether the attackers would allow him to pull away unmolested , he had his answer a moment later . `` Over this way ! ! He ain't gone far '' ! ! A harsh cry floated to him across the brush . A carbine cracked more loudly , and a slug clipped fragments from the brush off at one side . The would-be assassin had his position figured pretty close . Dismounting , Russ looked about hastily . Toward the west this depression led toward a draw . Leading his pony , he hurried that way , not remounting till he was well below the level of the surrounding range . Swinging up then , and bending forward over the horn , he urged his mount down the meandering draw . He had not covered a hundred yards before a gun crashed from somewhere behind . He had been sighted , and his attacker pumping shot after shot . A shot or two went wild before Cobb felt something tug at his foot . A slug had torn half of his stirrup-guard away . A second twitched his shirtsleeve , and he felt a brief burn on his upper arm . Another snarled close overhead . `` Jumping Jerusalem ! ! Let's get out of here '' ! ! At the first shot Russ had hurled his mount to the left toward the side of the winding draw . The long minute before he reached effective cover seemed endless . Sweeping a look around , he saw that he was safe for the moment . He heard cries from behind him , but he could make out no words . He dashed madly for the next elbow turn in the draw , and made it . Recklessly hurling the bronc sidewise into an intersecting draw , he plunged forward with undiminished speed . Gradually the wash climbed upward , forcing him toward open range . Yet he must chance it . He clambered out of the dwindling wash , the loose dirt flying behind him , and flashed a look about . Early in November the clouds lifted enough to carry out the assigned missions . And Sweeney Squadron put its first marks on the combat record . Every plane that could fly was sent into the air . Cricket took eight ships and went south across the Straits and along the north coast of Mindanao to Cagayan . Anything the enemy flew or floated was his target . Fleischman with eight was to patrol the Leyte Gulf area , with his main task to get any kamikaze before they got to the ships . Greg himself took two flights , with Todman leading the second , to patrol and look for targets of opportunities around Ormoc on the east coast of Leyte . Each plane carried two five-hundred pound bombs . A weapons carrier took Greg , Todman , Belton , Banjo Ferguson , and Walters and the others the two miles from the bivouac area to the strip . It was a rough long ride through the mud and pot holes . No one had much to say . The sky glowered down at them . There was a feeling that this mission would be canceled like all the others and that this muddy wet dark world of combat would go on forever . The truck dropped them off at the various revetments spread through the jungle . Donovan snatched Greg's chute from him with a belligerent motion and almost ran to the plane with it . His face was dark as the sky above it as he stood on the wing and waited for his pilot . Greg climbed into the cockpit feeling as if he had never been in one before . But his hands and those of Donovan moved automatically adjusting and arranging in the check-out procedure . `` I've got her as neat as I can '' , Donovan said , as he dropped the straps of the Seton harness over Greg's shoulders . `` But this goddamn climate . It's for carabao not airplanes '' . `` We'll make out . Don't you worry , chief '' , Greg replied , wondering if he himself believed it . `` Yeah . See you '' , Donovan said as he jumped off the wing . The expression was his trade-mark , his open sesame to good luck , and his prayer that pilot and plane would always return . At the prearranged time , Greg started the engine and taxied out . From the time the chocks were pulled until the plane was out of sight , he knew Donovan would keep his back to the strip . He wondered where the superstition had originated that it was bad luck for a crew chief to watch his plane take off on a combat mission . Yet long before the scheduled time for return , Donovan would be watching for every speck in the sky . Greg rumbled down the rough metal taxi strip , and one by one the seven members of his flight fell in behind him . The dark brown bombs hanging under each wing looked large and powerful . The pilots' heads looked ridiculously small . The control tower gave him immediate take-off permission , and the clean roar of the engine that took him off the rough strip spoke well of the skill of Donovan . Greg's mission was the last to leave , and as he circled the ships off Tacloban he saw the clouds were dropping down again . To the west , the dark green hills of Leyte were lost in the clouds about halfway up their slopes . Underneath him the sea was a dark and muddied gray . Water splashed against his windshield as he led the flight in and out of showers . The metal strip they had taken off from was coal black against the green jungle around it . He possessed the fighter pilot's horror of bad weather and instrument flying , and he wondered , if the ceiling did drop , whether he and the other flights would be able to find their way back in this unfamiliar territory . He shivered in the warm cockpit . The overcast was solid above him . As far as he could see there was no hole to climb through it . They would have to go west through the narrow river valley that separated Leyte from Samar and hope that it didn't close in before they returned . Greg pushed the radio button on his throttle . `` Todman , let's try to go under this stuff . Stay in close and we'll go up the valley '' . `` Roger , Sweeney '' , Todman called back , and pulled his four in and slightly above Greg . Greg took the formation wide around three A-26 attack bombers that were headed north over the Gulf . He dropped down to five hundred feet , swinging a little north of the city of Tacloban , and punched into the opening that showed against the mountain . The valley was only a few hundred yards wide with just about room enough for a properly performed hundred-and-eighty-degree turn . It was only a fifteen-minute flight , but before it was through Greg felt himself developing a case of claustrophobia . The ceiling stayed solid above them at about eight hundred feet , and at times the sheer cliffs seemed about to close in . If the other pilots were worried , they did not show it . The formation remained perfect . When the sea was visible ahead of them , the relief was as great as if the sun had come out . He spread the flight out and led them across a point of land and then down the coast . Although they drew light ground fire they saw no signs of activity . Once Todman thought he had spotted a tank and went down to investigate while Greg covered him . `` Somebody beat us to it '' ! ! Todman said over the radio as he came back up in formation . Visibility continued to be limited , and Greg was never able to get above a thousand feet . It was frustrating . His earphones were constantly full of the sounds of enemy contacts made by other flights . He thought once that he identified the somewhat hysterical voice of Fleischman claiming a kill . But Greg's area remained as placid as a Florida dawn . Finally , as time began to run out , he headed into Ormoc and glide-bombed a group of houses that Intelligence had thought might contain Japanese supplies . The low clouds made bombing difficult . There was not enough room to make the usual vertical bomb run . The accuracy was deplorable . One of Greg's bombs hung up , and he was miles from the target before he could get rid of it . Only one of the flight scored a direct hit and the rest blew up jungle . With their load of bombs gone , the planes moved swiftly and easily . Greg went up tight against the ceiling and led them back to their pass to home . Mercifully , it was still open . Like a man making a deep dive , Greg took full breath and plunged back into the valley . He was about to make a gas check on his flight when Todman's voice broke in : `` Sweeneys ! ! Three bogies . Twelve o'clock level '' . Greg's eyes flicked up from his instrument panel . He saw them , specks against the gray , but closing fast . They were headed straight for each other on a collision course . Friend or enemy ? ? The same old question . And only a few seconds to answer it . `` Zeros '' ! ! Todman said excitedly , and hopefully . And then he thought Todman might be right . His mind flicked through the mental pictures he had from the hours of Aircraft Identification . He narrowed the shape down to two : either a Zero or a U. S. Navy type aircraft . If it were the enemy , tactically his position was correct . Japanese aircraft were strong on maneuverability , American on speed and firepower . His present maximum altitude , up against the overcast , gave him the opportunity to exploit his advantages . But it also made him conspicuous to the enemy , if it was the enemy , and he hadn't been spotted already . But the closing aircraft showed no sign of deviating from their original course . In seconds , Greg made his decision . He pushed the radio button . `` Sweeney Blue , hit the deck . Lots of throttle . Todman , you take the one on the left . I'll take the middle . Belton , the one on the right . If they're Japs . Let's make sure first '' . Greg had the stick forward and the throttle up before he heard the two `` Rogers '' . The planes , light with most of the gas burned out , responded beautifully . Greg's airspeed indicator was over 350 when he leveled off just above the trees . The opposing aircraft continued to come on . They appeared to be the enemy . Greg wished the Air Corps had continued to camouflage planes . There was , of course , no way for the other planes to get by them . It was a box . But they could turn and escape to the east . Greg pushed the radio button again . `` Todman , drop your second element back . If any of us miss , they can pick up the pieces . Now let's make sure they're Japs '' . Even as he said it , Greg knew they had found the enemy . The shapes were unmistakable and the Rising Suns were showing up , slightly brighter pinpoints in the gray gloom . Greg slapped his hand across the switches that turned on the guns and gun camera and gun sight . The circle with the dot in the center showed up yellow on the reflector glass in front of him . His hands shook . `` Arm your guns , Sweeneys '' . `` They're Japs . They're Japs '' , came a high-pitched voice . `` Greg to Sweeney Blue . One pass only . No turns . You'll bust your ass in this canyon . That's an order '' . He moved the flights over against one wall . It gave them all a chance to make a high-speed climbing turn attack and a break-away that would not take them into the overcast or force a tight-turn recovery . If the turn was too tight , a barrel roll would bring them out . A hell of an altitude for a barrel roll , but it could be done . Greg slammed his throttle to the fire wall and rammed up the RPM , and the engine responded as if it had been waiting . The clearly identifiable enemy continued on as if no one else were around . `` They haven't seen us '' , Greg yelled to himself over the engine noise . `` They haven't seen us '' . He hit the radio button . `` Now , Sweeneys , now . Let's take 'em home '' . He hauled back on the stick and felt his cheeks sag . Out of the corner of his eye , he watched his wingman move out a bit and shoot up with him . Perfect , he thought . With the rapid rate of closure , the approach from below , the side , and ahead , there would be only a moment when damage could be done . Just like shooting at a duck while performing a half-gainer from a diving board . He tightened his turn . His nose up . It was going to be dangerous . Eight aircraft in this small box . Please , dear God , make my pilots good , he prayed . He took a lead on the enemy , using a distance of five of the radii in his circular sight and then added another . The enemy did not veer . It did not seem possible that they hadn't been spotted . Blind fools . Now ! ! Greg's fingers closed on the stick trigger . The plane rumbled and slowed . Six red lines etched their way into the gray and vanished . As if drawn by a wire the enemy flew into them . Greg tightened his turn until the plane shuddered . Luck was with him . His burst held for a second on the engine section of the plane . The Jap's propeller flew off in pieces . A large piece of engine cowling vanished . It was all Greg had time to see . His maneuvering for the shot had placed him near the overcast , almost inverted and heading up into the clouds . His speed was dropping rapidly . If he spun out now , he would join his opponent on the ground . Wingman , stay clear , he prayed . He pushed stick and rudder and entered the overcast on his back . He fought the panic of vertigo . He had no idea which was up and which was down . He held the controls where they had been . Sweat popped out over him and he felt the slick between his palm and the stick grip . His air speed dropped until he thought he would spin out . Over the rattling of fenders , humming of tires and chattering of gears there was a charming melody of whispers and tiny giggles . Cool air moving slowly through the open or smashed-out side windows hinted of blooming roadside vegetation , and occasionally a faint fragrance of perfume swirled from the back seat . `` Moriarty '' , my driver suddenly exclaimed with something so definite , so final in his tone I once more repeated the absurdity , mustering all my latent powers of hypocrisy to sound convinced . We were coming to an intersection , turning right , chuffing to a stop . Forced to realize that this was the end of a very short line I scanned a road marker and discovered what the end of a slightly longer line would be for the old Mexican : Moriarty , New Mexico . `` Gracias . Adios '' , I said , exhausting my Spanish vocabulary on my host and exchanging one of a scarcely-tapped store of smiles with my host's daughters . I waved with discretion and moderation to the vague golden faces fading through rising dust and the distortions of the back window glass . Then I saw the father's head slightly turn ; ; gauche rainbow shapes replaced the poignant ovals of gold . Autos whizzed past . White-shirted and conservatively-cravated drivers stared conspicuously toward the eastern horizon and past my supplicating and accusing gaze . Suddenly a treble auto horn tootley-toot-tootled , and , thumbing hopefully , I saw emergent in windshield flash : red lips , streaming silk of blonde hair and -- ah , trembling confusion of hope , apprehension , despair -- the leering face of old Herry . `` Mor-ee-air-teeeee '' , he shrieked , his white teeth grossly counterpointing those of the glittering blonde . Over the rapidly-diminishing outline of a jump seat piled high with luggage Herry's black brushcut was just discernible , near , or enviably near that spot where -- hidden -- more delicately-textured , most beautifully tinted hair must still be streaming back in cool , oh cool wind sweetly perfumed with sagebrush and yucca flowers and engine fumes . Damn his luck . I would have foregone my romantic chances rather than leave a friend sweltering and dusty and -- Well , at least I wouldn't have shouted back a taunt . Still nursing anger I listlessly thumbed a car that was slowly approaching , its pre-war chrome nearly blinding me . It was stopping . Just as I straightened up with my duffel bag , I heard : `` Sahjunt Yoorick , meet Mrs. Major J. A. Roebuck '' . The voice was that of Johnson , tail gunner off another crew . Squeezing a look between Johnson's fat jowls and the car frame a handsome and still darkhaired lady inquired `` Y'all drahve '' ? ? I nodded . `` Onleh one thiihng '' , Mrs. Roebuck continued . `` Ahm goin nawth t'jawn mah husbun in Sante Fe , an y'all maht prefuh the suhthuhn rewt . But Corporal Johnson has alreadeh said it didn make no diffrunce t'hi-im '' . I said that it didn't make any difference to me either , as far as I knew . How far I knew will shortly become apparent . Let me pass over the trip to Sante Fe with something of the same speed which made Mrs. Roebuck `` wonduh if the wahtahm speed limit '' ( 35 m.p.h. ) `` is still in ee-faket '' . I let up on the accelerator , only to gradually reach again the 60 m.p.h. which would , I hoped , overhaul Herry and the blonde , and as there were cars whose drivers apparently had something more important to catch than had I , Mrs. Major Roebuck settled down to practicing on Corporal Johnson the kittenish wiles she would need when making her duty call on Colonel and Mrs. Somebody in Sante Fe . When Johnson ejaculated `` Howsabout my buying us all a nice cold Co-cola , Ma'am '' ? ? Mrs. Roebuck smilingly declined and began suddenly to go on about her son , who was `` onleh a little younguh than you bawhs '' . Johnson never would have believed she had a son that age . Mrs. Roebuck thought Johnson was a `` sweet bawh t'lah lahk thet '' , but her Herman was getting to be a man , there was no getting around it . `` Just befoh he left foh his academeh we wuh hevin dack-rihs on the vuhranduh , Major Roebuck an Ah , an Huhmun says ' May Ah hev one too ' ? ? Just as p'lite an -- an cohnfidunt , an Ah says ' Uh coahse you cain't ' , but he says ' Whah nawt , you ah hevin one ' ? ? An Ah coudn ansuh him an so Ah said ' Aw right , Ah gay-ess , an his fathuh didn uttuh one wohd an aftuh Huhmun was gone , the majuh laughed an tole me thet he an the bawh had been hevin an occasional drink t'gethuh f'ovuh a yeah , onleh an occasional one , but just the same it was behahn mah back , an Ah doan think thet's nahce at all , d'you '' ? ? `` No , I don't '' , Johnson said . `` I'm a good Baptist , and drinking '' Mrs. Roebuck very kindly let me drive through Sante Fe to a road which would , she said , lead us to Taos and then Raton and `` eventshahleh '' out of New Mexico . How lightly her `` eventshah-leh '' passed into the crannies where I was storing dialect material for some vaguely dreamed opus , and how the word would echo . And re-echo . Hardly had Mrs. Roebuck driven off when a rusty pick-up truck , father or grandfather of Senor `` Moriarty's '' Ford sedan , came screeching to a dust-swirling stop , and a brown face appeared , its nose threatened by shards of what had once been the side window . `` Get in , buddies . Get in '' . The straight , black hair flopped in a vigorous nod , the slender nose plunged toward glass teeth and drew safely back . Johnson unwired the right hand door , whose window was , like the left one , merely loosely-taped fragments of glass , and Johnson wadded himself into a narrow seat made still more narrow by three cases of beer . `` In back , buddy '' , the driver said to me . Quickly but carefully lowering my duffel bag over the low side-rack , I stepped on the running board ; ; it flopped down , sprang back up and gouged my shin . The truck was hurtling forward . I seized the rack and made a western-style flying-mount just in time , one of my knees mercifully landing on my duffel bag -- and merely wrecking my camera , I was to discover later -- my other knee landing on the slivery truck floor boards and -- but this is no medical report . I was again in motion and at a speed which belied the truck's similarity to Senor X's Ford turtle . Maybe I would beat old Herry to Siberia after all . Whatever satisfaction that might offer . Something pulled my leg . I drew back , drawing back my foot for a kick . But it was only Johnson reaching around the wire chicken fencing , which half covered the truck cab's glassless rear window . The way his red rubber lips were stretched across his pearly little teeth I thought he was only having a little joke , but , no , he wanted me to bend down from the roar of wind so he could roar something into my ear . `` Wanna beer '' ? ? `` Hell , yes '' , I roared back between dusty lips . Did I want a beer ? ? Did an anteater want ants ? ? `` Bueno , amigo . Gracias '' , I hollered , my first long swallow filling me with confidence and immediately doubling the size of my Spanish vocabulary . At once my ears were drowned by a flow of what I took to be Spanish , but -- the driver's white teeth flashing at me , the road wildly veering beyond his glistening hair , beyond his gesticulating bottle -- it could have been the purest Oxford English I was half hearing ; ; I wouldn't have known the difference . Johnson was trying to grab the wheel , though the swerve of the truck was throwing him away from it . White teeth suddenly vanishing , the driver slammed the side of his bottle against Johnson's ear . We were off the road , gleaming barbed wire pulling taut . I ducked just as the first strand broke somewhere down the line and came whipping over the sideboards . We were in a field , in a tight , screeching turn . Prairie dogs were popping up and popping down . When I fell on my back , I saw a vulture hovering . Just as I got to my knees , there was again the sound of the fence stretching , and I had time only to start taking my kneeling posture seriously . This time no wire came whipping into the truck . We were back on the road . I regained my squatting position behind the truck cab's rear window . Johnson's left hand was pressed against the side of his head , red cheeks whitening beneath his fingers . `` Tee-wah '' , the driver cackled , his black eyes glittering behind dull silver chicken fencing . `` That was Tee-wah I was talking . You thought I was a Mexican , didn't you , buddy '' ? ? I nodded . `` Hell , that's all right , buddy '' , the Indian ( I now guessed ) said . `` Drink your beer '' . Miraculously , the bottle was still in my hand , foam still geysering over my ( luckily ) waterproof watch . No sooner had I started drinking than the driver started zigzagging the truck . The beer foamed furiously . I drank furiously . A long time . Emptied the bottle . Teeth again flashing back at me , the driver released a deluge of Spanish in which `` amigo '' appeared every so often like an island in the stormy waves of surrounding sound . I bobbed my head each time it appeared . Suddenly the Spanish became an English in which only one word emerged with clarity and precision , `` son of a bitch '' , sometimes hyphenated by vicious jabs of a beer bottle into Johnson's quivering ribs . A big car was approaching , its chrome teeth grinning . Beyond it the gray road stretched a long , long way . The car was just about to us , its driver's fat , solemn face intent on the road ahead , on business , on a family in Sante Fe -- on anything but an old pick-up truck in which two human beings desperately needed rescue . I tossed the bottle . High , so it would only bounce harmlessly but loudly off the car's steel roof . Too high . On unoccupied roadway the bottle shattered into a small amber flash . `` Aye-yah-ah-ah '' ! ! The Indian was again raising his bottle , but to my astonished relief -- probably only a fraction of Johnson's -- the bottle this time went to the Indian's lips . Another car was coming , a tiny , dark shape on a far hill . I started looking on the splintery truck bed for a piece of board , a dirt clod -- anything I could throw and with better aim than I had thrown the beer bottle . We were slowing . In the ditch sand was white and soft-looking , only an occasional pebble discernible , faintly gleaming . But Johnson couldn't quickly unwire the truck door , and if I escaped , he might suffer . The car was approaching fast . On the truck bed there was nothing smaller than a piece of rusty machinery ; ; with more time I could have loosened a small burr or cotter pin -- Suddenly and not a second too soon I thought of the coins in my pocket . There was no time to pick out a penny ; ; I got a coin between my thumb and forefinger , leaned my elbows in a very natural and casual manner on top of the truck cab and flipped my little missile . There was a blur just under my focus of vision , a crash ; ; the car's far windshield panel turned into a silver web with a dark hole in the center . I heard the screech of brakes behind me , an insane burst of laughter beneath me . Looking back I saw a gray-haired man getting out of his halted car and trying to read our license number . `` S-s-sahjunt '' . Johnson's fat hand , another bottle were protruding from the truck cab , and that self-proclaimed Baptist teetotaler , had a bottle at his own lips . Two cars came over a crest , their chrome and glass flashing . The Indian's arm whipped sidewise -- there was a flash of amber and froth , the crash of the bottle shattering against the side of the first car . Brakes shrieked behind us . I saw Johnson's bottle snatched from his hand , saw it go in a swirl of foam just behind the second car . This time there was no sound of brakes but the shrieking of women . I looked back at pale ovals framed in the elongated oval of the car's rear window . `` Drink , you son of a bitch '' ! ! I quickly turned around and began to drink . But the Indian was jabbing another bottle toward Johnson . I guided her to the divan , turned off the TV , faced her . She sat quietly , staring at me from the wide eyes . And what eyes they were . Big and dark , a melting , golden brown . Eyes like hot honey , eyes that sizzled . Plus flawless skin , smooth brow and cheeks , lips that looked as if you could get a shock from them . It was a disturbingly familiar face , too , but I couldn't remember where we had met . I said , `` Do we know each other , Miss '' ? ? `` No , I remembered reading about you in the papers and that you lived here , and when it happened all I could think of was '' -- This time she stopped the rush of words herself . `` I'm sorry . Shall I go on '' ? ? She smiled . It was her first smile . But worth waiting for . `` Sure '' . I said . `` But one word at a time , O.K. '' ? ? She was still hugging the stained coat around her , so I said , `` Relax , let me take your things . Would you like a drink , or coffee '' ? ? `` No , thanks '' . She stood up , pulled the coat from her shoulders and started to slide it off , then let out a high-pitched scream and I let out a low-pitched , wobbling sound like a muffler blowing out . She was wearing nothing beneath the coat . She jerked the coat back on and squeezed it around her again , but not soon enough . There had been a good second or two during which my muffler had been blowing out , and now I was certain I'd seen her somewhere before . `` I forgot '' ! ! She yelped . `` Oh , do forgive me . I'm sorry '' ! ! `` I forgive '' -- `` That's what started all the trouble in the first place . Oh , dear , I'm all unstrung '' . `` You and me both , dear . Haven't we haven't I seen you . I mean , surely we've '' -- `` You may have seen me on TV '' , she said . `` I've done several filmed commercials for '' -- Then it hit me . `` Zing '' ! ! I cried . `` Why , yes . And you recognized me '' ? ? `` Yes , indeed . In fact , I was watching you on that little seventeen-inch screen when you rang my bell . Man , you rang -- it was in color , too , Miss , and Miss ? ? What's your name , anyway ? ? Ah , you were splendid '' . I sat by her on the divan . `` Splendid . In a waterfall and all that '' . `` That's the last one we did . That was a fun one '' . `` I'll bet . It was fun for me , all right . I don't mean to pry , but do they hide the swimsuit with the bubbles ? ? I mean : Is advertising honest ? ? `` It depends on who does it . I never wear anything at all . It wouldn't -- wouldn't seem fair , somehow '' . `` I couldn't agree with you more '' . `` I really do have something important to tell you , Mr. Scott . About the murder '' . `` Murder ? ? Oh , yeah '' , I said . `` Tell me about the murder '' . She told me . Zing was the creation of two men , Louis Thor and Bill Blake , partners in zing ! ! , Inc. . They'd peddled the soap virtually alone , and without much success , until about a year ago , when -- with the addition of `` SX-21 '' to their secret formula and the inauguration of a high-powered advertising campaign -- sales had soared practically into orbit . Their product had been endorsed by Good Housekeeping , the A.M.A. , and the Veterinary Journal , among other repositories of higher wisdom , and before much longer if you didn't have a cake of their soap in the john , even your best friends would think you didn't bathe . My lovely caller -- Joyce Holland was her name -- had previously done three filmed commercials for zing , and this evening , the fourth , a super production , had been filmed at the home of Louis Thor . The water in Thor's big swimming pool had been covered with a blanket of thick , foamy soapsuds -- fashioned , of course , from zing -- Joyce had dived from the board into the pool , then swirled and cavorted in her luxurious `` bath '' while cameras rolled . The finished -- and drastically cut -- product would begin with a hazy longshot of Joyce entering the suds , then bursting above the pool's surface clad in layers of lavender lather , and I had a hunch this item was going to sell tons and tons of soap ; ; even to clean men and boys . Joyce went on , `` When we'd finished , Lou -- Mr. Thor -- asked me to stay a little longer . He wanted a few stills for magazine ads , he said . Everybody left and I stayed in the pool , then Lou came back alone and leaped into the pool too . And he didn't have any clothes on '' . `` He didn't '' ! ! `` Yes , he didn't . Did , I mean '' . She paused . `` Did leap into the pool , and didn't have anything on . Anyway , it was evident what he had in mind '' . `` You got away , didn't you '' ? ? `` Yes . He caught up with me once and grabbed me , but I was all covered with zing -- it's very slippery , you know '' . `` I didn't know . I wouldn't have the stuff in the house . But I'm pleased to hear '' -- `` So I just scooted out of his clutches . I swam like mad , got out of the pool , grabbed my robe , and ran to the car . The keys were still in it , and I was miles away before I remembered that my clothes and purse and everything were still in the little cabana where I'd changed '' . She'd driven around for a while , Joyce said , then , thinking Louis Thor would have calmed down by that time , she'd gone back to his home on Bryn Mawr Drive , parked in front , and walked toward the pool . While several yards from it , still concealed by the shrubbery , she'd seen two men on her left at the pool's edge . She went on : `` A man was holding onto Lou , holding him up . Maybe Lou was only unconscious , but right then I thought he must be dead . The man shoved him into the water , then ran past the cabana . There's a walk there that goes out to Quebec Drive . I was so scared well , I just ran to my car and came here '' . `` You know who the other man was '' ? ? `` No , I never did see his face . I didn't get a good look at him at all , his back was to me , and I was so scared It was just somebody in a man's suit . But I'm sure the other one was Lou '' . What Joyce wanted me to do was go to Thor's house and `` do whatever detectives do '' , and get her clothes -- and handbag containing her identification . She realized I'd have to notify the police , but fervently hoped I could avoid mentioning her name . Her impact in the zing commercials had led to her being considered for an excellent part in an upcoming TV series , Underwater Western Eye , a documentary-type show to be sponsored by Oatnut Grits . But if Joyce got involved in murder or salacious scandal , the role would probably go to the sponsor's wife , Mrs. Oatnut Grits . Or at least not to Joyce . `` And I so want the part '' , she said . `` The commercials have just been for money , there hasn't been any real incentive for me to do them , but in Underwater Western Eye I'd have a chance to act . I could show what I can do '' . As far as I was concerned , she had already and had dandily shown what she could do . But I promised Joyce I would mention her name , if at all , only as a last resort . Seeming much relieved , she smiled one of those worth-waiting-for smiles , and I smiled all the way into the bedroom . There I got my Colt Special and shoulder harness , slipped my coat on , and went back into the front room . Joyce squirmed a little on the divan . `` I'm starting to itch '' , she said . `` Itch '' ? ? `` Yes , I'm still all covered with that soap . I was loaded with suds when I ran away , and I haven't had a chance to wash it off . Mmmm , it sure itches '' . `` You might as well wait here while I'm gone , so you can use my shower if you'd like '' . `` Oh , I'd love to '' . I showed her the shower and tub , and she said , smiling , `` If you really don't mind , I think I'll get clean in the shower , then soak for a few minutes in your tub . That always relaxes me . Doesn't it you '' ? ? `` Only when I do it '' . I shook my head . One of my virtues or vices is a sort of three-dimensional imagination complete with sound effects and glorious living color . `` Soak as long as you want , Joyce . It'll probably be at least an hour or two before I can check back with you . So you'll have everything all to yourself , doggone '' I looked at my watch . Ten after nine . Time to go , I supposed . `` Well , goodbye '' , I said . `` Goodbye . You'd better hurry '' . `` Oh , you can count on that '' . She smiled slightly . Softly . Warmly . `` Don't hurry too much . I'll be soaking for at least half an hour '' . That was all she said . But suddenly those hot-honey eyes seemed to have everything but swarms of bees in them . However , when there's a job to be done , I'm a monstrosity of grim determination , I like to think . I spun about and clattered through the front room to the door . As I went out , I could hear water pouring in the shower . Hot water . She wouldn't be taking a cold shower . Hell , she couldn't . Bryn Mawr Drive is only two or three miles from the Spartan , and it took me less than five minutes to get there . But the scene was not the quiet , calm scene I'd expected . Four cars were parked at the curb , and two of them were police radio cars . Lights blazed in the big house and surrounding grounds . I followed a shrubbery-lined gravel path alongside the house to the pool . Two uniformed officers , a couple of plain-clothesmen I knew , and two other men stood on a gray cement area next to the pool on my left . At the pool's far end was the little cabana Joyce had mentioned , and on the water's surface floated scattered lavender patches of limp-looking lather . A few yards beyond the group of men , a man's nude body lay face down on a patch of thick green dichondra . Lieutenant Rawlins , one of the plain-clothesmen , spotted me and said , `` Hi , Shell '' , and walked toward me . `` How'd you hear about this one '' ? ? I grinned , but ignored the question . He didn't push it ; ; Rawlins worked out of Central Homicide and we'd been friends for years . He filled me in . A call to the police had been placed from here a couple of minutes after nine P.M. , and the first police car had arrived two or three minutes after that -- 10 minutes ago now . Present at the scene -- in addition to the dead man , who was indeed Louis Thor -- had been Thor's partner Bill Blake , and Antony Rose , an advertising agency executive who handled the zing account . Neither of them , I understood , had been present at the filming session earlier . `` What were they doing here '' ? ? I asked Rawlins . `` They were supposed to meet Thor at nine PM for a conference concerning the ad campaign for their soap , a new angle based on this SX-21 stuff '' . `` Yeah , I've heard more about SX-21 than space exploration lately . What is the gunk '' ? ? `` How would I know ? ? It's a secret . That was the new advertising angle -- something about a Lloyd's of London policy to insure the secrecy of the secret ingredient . Actually , only two men know what the formula is , Blake and '' -- He stopped and looked at Thor's body . I said , `` O.K. , so now only Blake knows . How's it strike you , foul or fair '' ? ? `` Can't say yet . Deputy coroner says it looks like he sucked in a big pile of those thick suds and strangled on 'em . The PM might show he drowned instead , but that's what the once-over-lightly gives us . Accident , murder , suicide -- take your pick '' . `` I'll pick murder . Anything else '' ? ? `` According to Rose , he arrived here a couple minutes before nine and spotted Thor in the water , got a hooked pole from the pool-equipment locker and started hauling him out . Too many people think that the primary purpose of a higher education is to help you make a living ; ; this is not so , for education offers all kinds of dividends , including how to pull the wool over a husband's eyes while you are having an affair with his wife . If it were not for an old professor who made me read the classics I would have been stymied on what to do , and now I understand why they are classics ; ; those who wrote them knew people and what made people tick . I worked for my Uncle ( an Uncle by marriage so you will not think this has a mild undercurrent of incest ) who ran one of those antique shops in New Orleans' Vieux Carre , the old French Quarter . The arrangement I had with him was to work four hours a day . The rest of the time I devoted to painting or to those other activities a young and healthy man just out of college finds interesting . I had a one-room studio which overlooked an ancient courtyard filled with flowers and plants , blooming everlastingly in the southern sun . I had come to New Orleans two years earlier after graduating college , partly because I loved the city and partly because there was quite a noted art colony there . When my Uncle offered me a part-time job which would take care of my normal expenses and give me time to paint I accepted . The arrangement turned out to be excellent . I loved the city and I particularly loved the gaiety and spirit of Mardi Gras . I had seen two of them and we would soon be in another city-wide , joyous celebration with romance in the air ; ; and , when you took a walk you never knew what adventure or pair of sparkling eyes were waiting around the next corner . The very faces of the people bore this expectation of fun and pleasure . It was as if they could hardly wait to get into their costumes , cover their faces with masks and go adventuring . My Uncle and I were not too close socially because of the difference in our ages . Sometimes I wondered vaguely what he did about women for my Aunt , by blood , had died some years ago , but neither of us said anything . One Monday morning I saw him approach the store with a woman and introduce me to her as my new Aunt . They were married over the week-end , though he was easily sixty and she could not have been even thirty . She looked more like twenty-five or six . It was really a May and December combination . My new Aunt was perhaps three or four years older than I and it had been a long time since I had seen as gorgeous a woman who oozed sex . There was something about the contour of her face , her smile that was like New Orleans sunshine , the way she held her head , the way she walked -- there was scarcely anything she did which did not fascinate me . Her legs were the full , sexy kind , full bodied like a rare wine and just as tantalizing to the appetite ; ; the calf was magnificent , the ankle perfect . You must forgive me if I seem to dwell too much on her physical aspects but I am an artist , accustomed to studying the physical body . The true artist is like one of those scientists who , from a single bone can reconstruct an animal's entire body . The artist looks at an ankle , a calf , a bosom and , in his mind's eye , the clothes drop away and he sees her as she really is . And that is the way I first saw her when my Uncle brought her into his antique store . That she impressed me instantly was obvious ; ; I was aware that when our eyes met we both quickly averted them . I thought I saw a faint surge of color rise to her neck and quickly suffuse her cheeks . True , she was my Aunt , married to an Uncle related to me only by marriage , but why she had married a man twice her age , and more , perhaps , I did not know or much care . She was standing with her back to the glass door . Her form was silhouetted and with the strong light I could see the outlines of her body , a body that an artist or anyone else would have admired . As it is in so many affairs of the heart , a man and a woman meet and something clicks . Something clicked in this instance , but I treated her circumspectly and I felt that she knew it , for we both kept our distance . When she appeared at the store to help out for a few hours even my looking at her was surreptitious lest my Uncle notice it . And then I became aware that she , too , glanced at me surreptitiously . I felt that her eyes were undressing me as if she were a painter and I a nude model . I dismissed these feelings as wishful thinking but I could not get it out of my head that we had a strong physical attraction for one another and we both feared to dwell on it because of our relationship . When our eyes met the air was filled with an unuttered message of `` Me , too '' . You have probably experienced this . It is nothing you can put your fingers on but the air suddenly fills with a high charge of electricity . Why she married him I do not know . I myself was fond of him but what a young woman half his age saw in him was a mystery to me . He already had that slow pace that comes over the elderly , while she herself had all the signs of one who appreciates the joys of living . Perhaps , with my Uncle , she found a measure of economic security that she needed ; ; or maybe she liked men old enough to be her father ; ; some women with father fixations do . For several weeks we eyed one another almost like sparring partners , and then one day Uncle was slightly indisposed and stayed home ; ; his bride opened the store . I was waiting in front of it when she showed up and told me of my Uncle's indisposition . Even as she was telling me about it I became aware of a give-away flush that suffused her neck and moved upwards to her cheeks , and subconsciously I realized that when she entered the store she did not switch on the lights . The cavernous depth , cluttered with antiques , echoed to her hard heels as she walked directly to the office in the rear and took the seat at his desk . She placed her palms , fingers outspread , on the desk in an odd gesture as if to say , `` Now , what next '' ? ? I was aware of a humid look in her eyes that told me the time was opportune . There was little likelihood of any customers walking in at that hour . I was standing beside her , watching the outspread palms and wondering about the old horsehair sofa against the wall on which he sometimes napped . I bent and kissed the still pink neck and suddenly she jumped up , and her two arms encircled me in a bear-like crush . Her mouth , which had been so much in my thoughts , was warm and moist and tender . I heard her murmur , `` We'd better lock the door '' . It did not take me long to slip the bolt securely and return to the rear and its couch . When we opened the door again for business and switched on the lights she said : `` He will not always be indisposed '' . `` I know . I was thinking about that . How will we work it out '' ? ? `` I don't know '' , she said . `` You're the man . You figure it out . I've noticed the way you've been looking at me ever since we met '' . `` I guess we both felt it '' . I said . `` I guess so '' , she said . `` But now what '' ? ? Even as I said it I realized that an education can be invaluable . `` I know what we can do '' , I said . `` Tell him I made a pass at you '' . She raised a protesting hand with a startled air . `` What are you trying to do ? ? Get thrown out ? ? If I even hint at it do you think it will matter that you are his nephew -- and not even a blood nephew '' ? ? `` I don't want to be thrown out and I don't think I will . I think I have a way so we can carry on without his suspecting us '' . `` By telling him you are making passes at me '' ? ? She said incredulously . `` When I was in college '' , I grinned , `` I remember a poem I had to read in my lit class . I don't even remember who wrote it but it was one of those 15th or 16th century poets . In those days poems often told a story in verse and those boys had some corkers to tell ; ; and now I think we can use the knowledge they passed on to us . Tomorrow Mardi Gras opens officially . A lot of people will roam the streets in costumes and masks , and having a ball . There will be romance and flirtation . If you tell him I made a pass at you he might think you misunderstood something I said or did , so instead of just telling him I made a pass , say I tried to date you and that you agreed so you could prove to him what a louse I really am . We made a rendezvous tomorrow evening at nine on some street near Lake Ponchartrain . And to prove what you tell him about me you suggest that he keep the date instead . You are both the same size . He could use your clothes for a costume and a heavy veil for a mask . When I show up he will know you are a good wife to have told him about it '' . `` But you '' -- she began . `` Don't worry about me . It will turn out all right '' . `` I don't understand '' , she insisted . `` Are you trying to cut your throat '' ? ? `` No '' , I chuckled , `` I'm just beginning to collect dividends on my investment in education '' . As we expected , on the following day my Uncle was completely recovered and opened the store as usual at 10 in the morning . I felt that he looked at me coldly and appraisingly and seemed to be uncertain what his attitude towards me should be , but he did not say one word which might indicate that he had been told of advances to his wife . I quit work at my usual hour as if this day was no different from other days . I heard subsequently that my Uncle and Aunt had dinner in a nearby restaurant in the French Quarter after which he went home to get into his costume to keep the date . Shortly before nine I drove my jalopy to the street facing the Lake and parked the car in shadows far enough away from the rendezvous corner but near enough to keep the corner in clear view . A few minutes later I saw my Uncle's car drive up and a woman's figure emerge and walk to the corner . I must say the figure was well made up . If it were not that I knew who it was I could have mistaken it for my Aunt so well did her clothes fit him . In one hand he gripped firmly a parasol though there had been no indication of rain . I suspected why he brought it along . In the half darkness I approached cautiously , making sure he did not see me . He was looking out on the dark waters of the Lake when I came upon him and without wasting words I smacked him hard across the face . `` You cheap bitch '' ! ! I exclaimed . `` You cheap , no good , two-timing bitch ! ! You get a good , loyal husband -- smack ! ! -- and you fall for a pass by his own nephew ! ! You should -- smack ! ! -- be ashamed of yourself . He had better write a postcard to Walter . He opened the myth book again and there ( along the margin next to Robert Graves' imaginative interpretation of the creation of the Dactyls from Rhea's fingertips ) were the names of four Munich bars and Meredith Wilder's address . The bars were marked as Walter had marked them in a small black book kept in a nearly secret drawer . The code , which had probably something to do with sex or some other interest , Nicolas was determined to find out and put to use . A card to Walter would get him an introduction to this Meredith , and that might be good for something . Nicolas called on his muse , a line came back : `` Squaresville , man , and all the palazzos are crummy Palasts '' . That ought to draw a laugh , Nicolas reasoned , as he stored the line away on the wax tape that was his mind . And indeed , his postcard did draw from Walter a letter recommending his friend , the poet Nicolas Manas , to his friend Meredith Wilder . Five days later , on receiving it , Meredith sat drumming his dactyls on his writing table . Dammit ! ! He inwardly cried . His hand was large and square and heavily tanned . The voice crying in him was the voice of guilt . His four weeks in Italy had turned into nearer three months . He had returned to the pension a week ago . Now , he was just in the late poems of Holderlin and therefore had most of the nineteenth century before him -- plus next semester's class preparation . He was determined to spend an industrious summer . Well , maybe Manas wouldn't call . Meredith's fingers slowed and stopped over a line before him : Sie lacheln , die Schwarzen Hexen . The menace of Manas gradually faded as Meredith asked himself should he translate it , ' How the dark fates laughed ' ? ? Or , more rhythmically , ' The swarthy witches are laughing ' ? ? And he missed the point that the swarthy witches might be laughing at him for hoping to escape Nicolas Manas . But Nicolas , too , was being interrupted , that morning . Not by the 11:00 sun which had spread a warmth around his spot of grass in the English Gardens and sent him off to sleep ; ; but by a blond girl in a sweater and skirt who stood a few yards off and tenderly regarded him . Should she wake him ? ? She didn't have the heart . Her heart , her maternal feeling , in fact her being was too busy expressing itself , as quietly thrilled by this sight of her Nicolas curled asleep under a blanket , in a park like a scene from Poussin . She was just not able to break the spell . ( Would she have been able to had she known that the blanket belonged to a young ballet dancer Nicolas had found his first night in one of Walter's marked bars ? ? Nicolas : `` Look , Nicolas doesn't go to bed with boys -- no sex , see ? ? So if all these beers was to get me in bed , man , you just spent a lot of money '' . Ballet dancer : Protests , tears , and `` take what you want , Nicolas , I am a dancer , you are a poet , it is all beautiful '' . To this meek conjugation Nicolas had replied , `` O.K. I can use this blanket . And when you get off this job tonight , well , you can gimme something to eat '' . And , as a matter of fact , Nicolas had slept in the park only part of one night , when he discovered that Munich's early mornings even in summer are laden with dew . He had always known how to find a bed , and on his own terms . He used the blanket for late morning naps when hosts of the night had gone off to jobs and proved reluctant to leave him in their small rooms with their few possessions . Mary Jane Lerner knew none of this . ) Her Nicolas lay curled in the sun like a fawn , black hair falling over his eyes . She was telling herself that this might just be her reward at the end of a long meaningful search for truth . This was surely a reunion in art , it was all that poetry promised . That long night with Nicolas and marijuana in Venice had opened her eyes . His advice , his voice saying his poems , the fact that he had not so much as touched her -- on the contrary , he had put his head back and she had stroked his hair -- this was all new . Her eyes had opened , she had caught a glimpse of a new faith . The next day he was gone . Mary Jane might not be the most intelligent woman , but she was one of the most determined . Even so , it took her several days to force Walter to tell her Nicolas's whereabouts . Packing a small suitcase , informing her husband whom she found in Harry's Bar that she was taking a train to Germany to get away for a while , patting his arm , refusing a drink , getting on the train -- all this had only taken her two hours . She had arrived this morning and come straight to the English Gardens . `` Dear girl '' , Walter had finally said , `` he writes me that he is sleeping in the English Gardens '' . `` How like him '' ! ! Mary Jane had smilingly said . `` His address '' , Walter added , `` is that great foundling home , the American Express . And I will greatly appreciate it if you will not tell your husband . '' For the last half hour Mary Jane had criss-crossed half the length of the Gardens and , at last , come upon her knight . His presence there , asleep in the grass , confirmed all that Mary Jane believed it was in his power to teach her : freedom from the tedium of needs such as hotels , the meaning of nature , how to live , simply , with the angels . She set down her suitcase . Should she wake him ? ? No . Smiling , she sat down on the suitcase and waited and watched . The sun grew hotter as it approached the midday . Nicolas was dreaming he had his head pressed against the dashboard of a speeding car . He began sweating . In his dream he cried , `` Slow down , for Chrissake '' ! ! He half woke and rolled over with his face in the cooler grass . His nose was tickled . He sneezed . He blew his nose expertly between his fingers . He spit . He half sat up and scratched at the hair on his forehead and then , more vigorously , between his legs . He belched , he stretched . Mary Jane got up , quietly , and walked away . Twenty minutes later she was at the desk of the Grafin's pension , her tears dried , signing a hotel form and asking for a bath . Mary Jane belonged to a world acquainted with small attractive hotels and pensions in all the major and minor cities . She had retreated to this world . The Grafin , who was charmed by her , told her , `` Your sister who was here two years ago has quite dark hair . Families are very interesting . Nevertheless , there is no bath . But a young American has a bath next to his room and I shall ask him if you might use it this once . And then we shall see . '' ( The Grafin was partial to the word shall . ) Meredith was irritated when the Grafin knocked at his door and told him , `` She is a great beauty ! ! Shall we allow her not to have a bath ? ? Actually , she is a sad beauty , I believe . You shall see her at dinner '' . Rather erotically he listened to the bath water running ; ; when it stopped he began busily typing , sitting up in a virtuous way . Before dinner , he shaved for the second time that day . A thing he did not like doing , generally . Singing into the mirror and his interested eyes , he was pleased to note , when he stripped for his own bath , that he still had the best part of his Italian sun tan . He flexed his muscles for several minutes , got into the tub , and then grew self-conscious of splashing as he washed . In the small gallery used as the guests' dining room , Meredith sat down at his place and , as always , began teasing the young waitress . He was asking had it been she who left the love note in his sheets ( she also served as maid ) when he saw the Grafin followed by a stately blond girl approaching his table . It would be literary license calculated to glamorize life to say that he , oh , dropped his napkin , so startled was he by Mary Jane's beauty . Yet he did drop his badinage with the ordinary country girl as much in deference to the Grafin as acknowledgement that here , indeed , was something special . Mary Jane had made very little effort . Above a dark green skirt she wore a pale green cashmere sweater with , as he soon perceived , no brassiere beneath . Her white blond hair was clean and brushed long straight down to her shoulders . Perhaps her eyes were larger and more of a summer blue for all they had seen and wept that day . She had touched her face , truly a noble and pure face , only with a lip salve which made her lips glisten but no redder than usual . The result was grace and modesty . As she was rather tired this evening , her simple `` Thank you for the use of your bath '' -- when she sat down opposite him -- spoken in a low voice , came across with coolnesses of intelligence and control . Meredith began falling in love . Soup : `` Only this morning '' ; ; veal cutlets : `` Oh , I couldn't possibly eat all this '' ! ! ; ; Wine : `` Then you were typing poems this afternoon '' ? ? ; ; Fruit compote : `` If you think I would understand it '' ; ; a smile . `` What a beautiful room . Like as if it were built of books '' . Having opened the windows onto the terrace , lit the fire , translated the motto , Meredith grinned and took down a little triplet of books bound together in old calfskin . Opening these he brought out a schnapps bottle and small gold thimble-sized glasses hidden inside it . `` I think the maids tipple in the afternoon '' . `` Those sweet girls ? ? Oh you're joking . It tastes a little like poppyseed . What's its name ? ? Steinhager '' She whispered Steinhager to herself , several times , memorizing it . `` Would you first read the poem aloud to me and then let me read it to myself '' ? ? Meredith's voice was always deep , with rough bass notes in it ; ; in reading , on platforms , even in the large auditorium of the Y.M.H.A. , Poetry Center nights , his voice was intimate , thoughtful , and a trifle shy . His new poem , a love poem , told of a young husband leading his wife upstairs to the bedroom when the lights in the house have failed . The husband points the steps out with his flashlight : `` Its white stare filling her pale eyes To the blind brim with appetite , Bleaching her hands that grazed my thighs And sent us from the table in surprise To let the dishes soak all night , '' ( Mary Jane asked herself if Meredith was blushing at this line , or was it the fire ? ? ) But he read on . In the bedroom before the husband and wife find their way to the bed , the lights go on : `` In dull domestic radiance I watch her staring face , still blind , Start wincing in obedience To dirty waters , counters , pots and pans , Waiting below stairs , in her mind '' . Mary Jane took the page from him and began reading it , moving her lips with the words . `` Oh , it's that myth , about Orpheus and What is her name ? ? I can never pronounce it '' . She repeated `` Eurydice '' . The third time rather urgently . But with her hand poem again . She raised her face and nodded , `` It's sweet , and very sad '' . They discussed the way people never tell each other the things on their minds . They finished the small bottle of Steinhager . She confessed she was unhappy , he asked was it her husband ? ? She began to explain , `` There was this poet , in Italy '' He interrupted , `` Please don't judge all poets '' . They smiled . At her door , two or three hours later , Mary Jane whispered , `` Everyone is asleep '' . Kissing her he whispered , several times , `` Eurydice '' . The third time rather urgently . But with her hand softly on his cheek for a last moment , she closed the door and he went back down the hall and into his bed excited , expectant , and finally faintly grinning with the feel of her hand against his mouth . They were west of the Sabine , but only God knew where . For three days , their stolid oxen had plodded up a blazing valley as flat and featureless as a dead sea . Molten glare singed their eyelids an angry crimson ; ; suffocating air sapped their strength and strained their nerves to snapping ; ; dust choked their throats and lay like acid in their lungs . And the valley stretched endlessly out ahead , scorched and baked and writhing in its heat , until it vanished into the throbbing wall of fiery orange brown haze . Ben Prime extended his high-stepped stride until he could lay his goad across the noses of the oxen . `` Hoa-whup '' ! ! He commanded from his raw throat , and felt the pain of movement in his cracked , black burned lips . He removed his hat to let the trapped sweat cut rivulets through the dust film upon his gaunt face . He spat . The dust-thick saliva came from his mouth like balled cotton . He moved back to the wheel and stood there blowing , grasping the top of a spoke to still the trembling of his played-out limbs . The burning air dried his sweat-soaked clothes in salt-edged patches . He cleared his throat and wet his lips . As cheerfully as possible , he said , `` Well , I guess we could all do with a little drink '' . He unlashed the dipper and drew water from a barrel . They could no longer afford the luxury of the canvas sweat bag that cooled it by evaporation . The water was warm and stale and had a brackish taste . But it was water . Thank the Lord , they still had water ! ! He cleansed his mouth with a small quantity . He took a long but carefully controlled draught . He replenished the dipper and handed it to his young wife riding the hurricane deck . She took it grudgingly , her dark eyes baleful as they met his . She drank and pushed back her gingham bonnet to wet a kerchief and wipe her face . She set the dipper on the edge of the deck , leaving it for him to stretch after it while she looked on scornfully . `` What happens when there's no more water '' ? ? She asked smolderingly . She was like charcoal , he thought -- dark , opaque , explosive . Her thick hair was the color and texture of charcoal . Her temper sparked like charcoal when it first lights up . And all the time , she had the heat of hatred in her , like charcoal that is burning on its under side , but not visibly . A ripple ran through the muscles of his jaws , but he kept control upon his voice . `` There must be some water under there '' . He tilted his homely face toward the dry bed of the river . `` We can get it if we dig '' , he said patiently . `` And add fever to our troubles '' ? ? She scoffed . `` Or do you want to see if I can stand fever , too '' ? ? `` We can boil it '' , he said . Her chin sharpened . `` We're lost and burning up already '' , she bit out tensely . `` The tires are rattling on the wheels now . They'll roll off in another day . There was no valley like this on your map . You don't even know where we're headed '' . `` Hettie '' , he said as gently as he could , `` we're still headed west . Somewhere , we'll hit a trail '' . `` Somewhere ! ! '' She repeated . `` Maybe in time to make a cross and dig our graves '' . His wide mouth compressed . In a way , he couldn't blame her . He had picked out this pathless trail , instead of the common one , in a moment of romantic fancy , to give them privacy on their honeymoon . It had been a mistake , but anything would have been a mistake , as it turned out . It wasn't the roughness and crudity and discomfort of the trip that had frightened her . She had hated the whole idea before they started . Actually , she had hated him before she ever saw him . It had been five days too late before he learned that she'd gone through the wedding ceremony in a semitrance of laudanum , administered by her mother . The bitterness of their wedding night still ripped within him like an open wound . She had jumped away from his shy touch like a cat confronted by a sidewinder . He had left her inviolate , thinking familiarity would gentle her in time . But each mile westward , she had hated him the deeper . He stared at the dipper , turning it over and over in his wide , calloused hands . `` I suppose '' , he muttered , `` I can sell the outfit for enough to send you home to your folks , once we find a settlement '' . `` Don't try to be noble '' ! ! Her laugh was hard . `` They wouldn't have sold me in the first place if there'd been food enough to go around '' . He winced . `` Hettie , they didn't sell you '' , he said miserably . `` They knew I was a good sharecrop farmer back in Carolina , but out West was a chance to build a real farm of our own . They thought it would be a chance for you to make a life out where nobody will be thought any better than the next except for just what's inside of them . Without money or property , what would you have had at Baton Rouge '' ? ? `` I might have starved , but at least I wouldn't be fried to a crisp and soaked with dirt '' ! ! He darkened under his heavy burn . His blue eyes sought the shimmering sea of haze ahead . To his puzzlement , there suddenly was no haze . The valley lay clear , and open to the eye , right up to the sharp-limbed line of gaunt , scoured hills that formed the horizon twenty miles ahead . Then he noticed the clouds racing upon them -- heavy , ominous , leaden clouds that formed even as they sliced over the crests of the surrounding hills . He had never seen clouds like them before , but he had the primitive feel of danger that gripped a man before a hurricane in Carolina . He hollered hoarsely , `` Hang on '' ! ! And goaded the oxen as he yelled . He wanted to turn them , putting the wagon against the storm . Too late , he realized that in turning , he had wheeled them onto a patch of sandy ground , instead of atop a grade or ridge . He swung up over the wheel . `` You had better get inside '' , he warned her . But she sat on in stubborn silence . The clouds bulged downward and burst suddenly into a great black funnel . Frozen , they stared at it whirling down the valley , gouging and spitting out boulders and chunks of earth like a starving hound dog cracking marrowbones . The six-ton Conestoga began to whip and shake . Their world turned black . It was filled with dust and wind and sound and violence . The heavens opened , pelting them with hail the size of walnuts . And then came the water -- not rain , but solid sheets that sluiced down like water slopping from a bucket . Walls of water rushed down the slopes and filled the hollows like the crests of flash floods . Through the splash of the rising waters , they could hear the roar of the river as it raged through its canyon , gnashing big chunks out of the banks . The jetting , frothing surface of the river reached the level of the runoff . The dangerous current upon the prairie ceased , but the water stood and kept on rising . They cringed under sodden covers , listening to the waves slop against the bottom . The cloudburst cut off abruptly . They were engulfed by the weird silence , broken only by the low , angry murmur of the river . Then the darkness thinned , and there was light again , and then bright sunlight . Beaten with fear and sound and wet and chill , they crawled to the hurricane deck and looked out haggardly at a world of water that reached clear to the surrounding hills . The water level was higher than their hubs . Only the heavy bones of the oxen kept them anchored . There was no real sign of the river now , just a roiling , oily ribbon of liquid movement through muddy waters that reached everywhere . Clumps of brush rode down the ribbon . Now and then , the glistening side of a half-swamped object showed as it swept past . The girl crawled out into the renewing warmth of the sunshine , hugging her shoulders and still trembling . Her face was pale but set and her dark eyes smoldered with blame for Ben . Out of compulsion to say something cheery , Ben Prime blurted , `` Well , we were lucky to be on soft ground when the first floodheads hit . At least , the wheels dug in . The soaking will put life back in the wagon , too '' . His wife didn't give a sign she'd heard . She was watching a tree ride wildly down that roiling current . Somebody was riding the tree . It raced closer and they could see a woman with white hair , sitting astride an upright branch . She did not call out . But as the tree passed , she lifted an arm in gesture of better luck and farewell . They watched the tree until it twisted sharply on a bend . It speared up into the air , then sinking back , the up-jutting branch turned slowly . The pale blob of the woman disappeared . `` There's the one who's lucky '' ! ! The girl murmured harshly . Ben's eyes strained with the bitter hurt , his homely face slashed with gray and crimson . Then he took off his wet boots and dropped down into the water to talk with the beasts , needing their comfort more than they needed his . It was nearly sundown and he went to the back of the wagon , half-swimming his way , for he was not a tall man . He let down the tailgate and was knocked over by the sluice of water . He sputtered back to his feet and scrambled madly to pull his bags of seed grain forward . They were already swollen to bursting . Of all their worldly belongings , next to the oxen and his gun , the seed grain had been the most treasured . It was spoiled now for seed , and it would sour and mold in three days if they failed to find a place and fuel to dry it . The oxen might as well enjoy it . He examined the water marks on the iron tires when the animals were finished . The waters lay muddy but placid , without a ripple of movement against the wheels ; ; there was not a match-width of damp mark to show they were receding . He doubted if a man could wade as far as the desolate , dry hills that rimmed the valley . A terrible , numbing sense of futility swept over him . He gripped the wheel hard to fight the despondency of defeat . Then he noticed that the dry wood of the wheels had swollen . The spokes were tight again , the iron tires gripped onto the wheels as if of one piece . Hope surged within him . He swung toward the front to give the news to Hettie , then stopped , barred from her by the vehemence of her blame and hate . Still , he felt better . A tight wagon meant so much . He got a small fire started and put on bacon and coffee . He poured the water off the sourdough and off the flour , salvaging the chunky , watery messes for biscuits of a sort . Their jams and jellies had not suffered . He found a jar of preserved tomatoes and one of eggs that they had meant to save . Now he broke them open , hoping a good meal might lessen this depression crushing Hettie . His long nose wiggled at the smells of frizzling bacon and heating java , but the fire was low , and he wanted to waste no time . He furled the slashed sides of the canvas tarpaulins , leaving the ribs and wagon open . He looked thoughtfully at his wife's trunk , holding her meager treasures . He said hesitantly , `` Hettie , I don't figure your things got wet too much . That's a good trunk . If you want to get them aired '' She said without turning her head , `` After that rain beating in atop the dust , there isn't a thing that won't be streaked '' . He drew a long breath and opened the trunk and hung out her clothes and spoilables upon the wagon ribs . Sulphur , oil , and copra make the kind of tinder any firebug dreams of . I suppose a Lascar sailor had sneaked a cigarette in the hold and touched off the blaze . Now , roaring up in great oily clouds of smoke and flames , the fierce heat quickly drove us to the stern where we huddled like suffocating sheep , not knowing what to do . The lifeboats were stuck fast . We couldn't budge them . I heard a cry from a stoker as a pillar of flame leaped from a hatch and tongued the man's bare back . He sprinted to the rail and leaped overboard into the shark-infested waters . One especially bad detonation shook Lifeboat No. 3 which trembled violently in the davits . Brassnose yelled : `` Come on , Sommers , Max step on it , we got a chance now . Heave on those ropes ; ; the boat's come unstuck '' . We pulled and swore and yanked and wept , scraping our hands until they bled profusely . The Bonaventure was quivering and lurching like an old spavined mare . Her stern was down and a sharp list helped us to cut loose the lifeboat which dropped heavily into the water . Brassnose , Max and I leaped into the sea and swam to the boat . `` Let's get away fast '' , said Brassnose , shaking water from his mop of bleached hair . `` That tub is going to explode all at once '' . Then the Bonaventure seemed to disintegrate with a roar of live steam , geysers of sparks and flames , and a dense cloud of black-and-orange smoke . Dimly , we heard the voices of men in mortal agony but we couldn't go back into that inferno . Already our leaky lifeboat was filled with five inches of water . `` Sommers , you bale while we row '' , Brassnose commanded . As best as I could determine , we were some 700 miles west of New Guinea , in the Bismark Archipelago . Three days previously , we had steamed past barren Rennell Island in the distance . Now we peered anxiously for any speck of land in the Pacific , for this interminable bailing would have to stop soon . There were gigantic blisters and rope burns on our hands ; ; our muscles were hot wires of pain . Brassnose was strangely silent . The big man with the whitened hair murmured something : his words sounded as if they were in the Manu tongue , which I recognized , having studied the dialect in my Anthropology 6 , class at the University of Chicago . He then said something which struck a chord in my memory . `` God help us if we're near the island of Eromonga . We'd be in real trouble then . I'd rather keep bailing -- or sink '' . I was puzzled by the remark , then I recalled the voice of mild Professor Howard Griggs three years ago in a university lecture on primitive societies . He had been speaking of this archipelago : `` Even when the islands were under German mandate before World War 1 , , Europeans gave Eromonga a wide berth . The place is inhabited by several hundred warlike women who are anachronisms of the Twentieth Century -- stone age amazons who live in an all-female , matriarchal society which is self-sufficient '' . I remembered , too , the jesting voice of a classmate , Bobby Pauson : `` But how do they reproduce , Dr. Griggs ? ? I'm sure that males have something to do with that process '' ! ! There had been classroom guffaws which quickly subsided as Professor Griggs said dryly : `` I see your point , Pauson . Of course , males play a role there , but believe me when I say you wouldn't enjoy yourself one bit on Eromonga . Indeed , you wouldn't live long , for the females either drive the men they've seized from neighboring islands back to their boats after exploiting them for amatory purposes , or they destroy them by revolting but ingenious methods . In fact , one important aspect of their very religion is the annihilation of men '' . `` I think I know what you mean , Brassnose '' , I said . `` I know something about Eromonga . Let's hope we come to a safer place '' . But we didn't . Three hours later , while we were bailing desperately , a dot of land came into view . Foster Lukuklu Frayne made a sign over his heart with his two linked thumbs : I recognized it as an ancient Manu gesture intended to propitiate the Devil . A half-hour passed ; ; we had drifted closer . In a voice so frightened as to seem not his own , the big bo'sun's mate quavered : `` Tchalo ! ! It is Eromonga -- look hard , you can see with your naked eye the wooden scaffolding on the cliff '' . I squinted at the looming shoreline . There was a wooden tower or derrick there , something like a ski jump ; ; it was perhaps 80 feet high and had been artfully constructed of logs . A fine example of engineering in a primitive society . `` What is the scaffolding for , Brassnose '' ? ? He made a sound of despair deep in his throat . It was embarrassing to see strapping , blonde Brassnose comport himself like a child who talks about bogeymen . `` Aaa-ee ! ! It is their tultul , the ' jumping platform ' of death . It is the last of the three tests of manhood which the women impose , to discover if a male is worthy of survival there . Often , I heard my uncles and cousins speak of it when I was a small boy growing up in Rabaul . They had never seen a tultul but they had heard about it from their fathers '' . Our lifeboat was filling rapidly and despite what I had heard of the inhabitants of Eromonga , I was glad to see a long and graceful outrigger manned by three bronzed girls glide out of a lagoon into the open sea and toward our craft . I expected Brassnose -- as a man with a strain of Melanesian in his blood -- to speak to them . But he had turned a sickly green and appeared tongue-tied or panicked . So , I mustered my few words of the Manu dialect and said , `` We greet you in peace . In ngandlu . My friends and I come from a ship which was destroyed by fire . We are thirsty and hungry ; ; our sore and burned hands and arms need attention '' . The girl in the prow of the outrigger turned a smile like a beacon on me . I noted that her full breasts were bare and that she wore a garland of red pandanus fruit in her blue-black hair . She said , `` My name is Songau and these girls are Ponkob and Piwen . You are welcome to Eromonga . My people await you on the shore . You shall have food , water and rest '' . Thirty minutes later , the outrigger grated on sand and other girls , waiting on shore , rushed forward to pull it up on the beach and make it fast with vine ropes to a large boulder . I saw a dozen or so other outriggers moored there . I looked . All my rosy visions of rest and even pleasure on this island vanished at the sight . There was a mound of bleached human bones and skulls at the base of the big wooden derrick . Some had been there for years ; ; others still had whitened shreds of decayed flesh sticking to them . There was one object which sickened yet fascinated me . This was also a corpse -- a male , judging from the coral arm bands , the tribal scars still discernible on the maggoty face , the painted bone of the warrior caste which still pierced the septum of the rotting nose . The body may have been two or three weeks' dead . I looked with revulsion at the legs . They were shattered . Many small bones protruded crazily from the shreds of flesh . The man must have leaped to his death from the topmost rung of the tultul . As if divining my thoughts , the girl Songau smiled warmly and said in the casual tone an American woman might use in describing her rose garden : `` This is our tultul , a jumping platform , aku . Later , you shall know it better . Is it not well-made ? ? Our old one blew down in a storm at the time of the pokeneu festival fifteen moons ago . It took thirty of our women almost six moons to build this one , which is higher and stronger than the old one . We are very proud of it '' . `` You have every right to be '' , I replied gravely in the Manu dialect , but my attention was fixed on Brassnose , the biggest and strongest of us . He looked as if he was going to keel over . I felt a queasiness in my own stomach but it wouldn't do to show these girls that we were afraid . Not so soon , anyway . I clapped the big man with the bleached hair on his shoulder and said heartily , hoping it would make an impression on the women : `` This one is the maku Frayne . He speaks your language too , for he is the grandson of a chieftain on Taui who made much magic and was strong and cunning . The maku Frayne has inherited this strength from his grandfather '' . This was the worst thing I could have said . Brassnose turned a stricken face toward me and said brokenly , `` Sommers , you meddling Yank , you're a fool ! ! They despise males who brag of their strength ; ; they destroy such men with their damned tests . You've ruined me , blast you '' ! ! At first , I thought he was out of his head , talking wildly like this . But a glance at Songau and the other women confirmed what Brassnose had blurted out . The women's faces had hardened after my statement . At a nod from Songau , four lithe and muscular girls darted to Frayne's side and seized him by the arms . The man was an ox and he put up a creditable struggle ; ; but four Eromonga women are more than a match for the strongest male that ever lived . Besides , terror had sapped some of Frayne's vitality and will . My last impression as they led him off to a stockade was of his pale face . In the Manu tongue , `` eromonga '' means manhood -- a quality which the women derisively toasted in weekly feasts at which great quantities of a brew like kava were imbibed . In the hut to which I was assigned -- Max had his own quarters -- my food was brought to me by a wrinkled crone with bare drooping breasts who seemed to enjoy conversing with me in rudimentary phrases . Her name was L'Turu and she told me many things . For an anthropologist , loquacious old L'Turu was a mine of information . Though I had a great dread of the island and felt I would never leave it alive , I eagerly wrote down everything she told me about its women . ( Her account was later confirmed by the Scobee-Frazier Expedition from the University of Manitoba in 1951 . ) From L'Turu , I heard that until about 1850 the people of this island -- which was about the size of Guam or smaller -- had been of both sexes , and that the normal family life of Melanesian tribes was observed here with minor variations . But in the middle of the last century an island woman named `` Karipo '' seized a spear in the heat of an inter-tribal battle and rallied the women after their men had fled . Miraculously , Karipo and her women had succeeded in driving a hundred invaders from the isle of Pamasu back to their war canoes , after considerable loss of life on both sides . Karipo was something of a politician as well as a militarist . She quickly exploited the exalted position she now occupied , by harassing the disorganized males and even putting many of them to death . Within a decade or less , few men were left and a feminist society had sprung up . `` Karipo was great goddess , told our mothers that men were not necessary except to father children '' , the crone told me . `` All men went away from here . Those who stayed had to pass tests . Few passed '' . She cackled with mirth , showing the stumps of betel-stained teeth . `` Karipo's women then named this place ' Eromonga ' -- manhood -- for just the strongest men could stay here . Come , I show you '' . The old woman arose stiffly and led me to a clearing where a small hut stood . In the shade of a palm tree in front of the squalid dwelling I saw four figures in a semi-circle on the ground . `` I guess he spent the morning getting himself all organized , then headed for home . Maybe to beat up on his squaw '' . Benson looked up and saw Ramey's long head tilt forward to rub his chin on the stiff edge of the overall bib . Ramey reached out with the tire iron and dislodged a chunk of mud that was caked on the spare tire rack . `` I'd like to know just which it is that those guys don't understand , the liquor or automobiles '' . Somehow the thought of a simple man bewildered by things no one had ever really helped him understand moved the driver . For a moment his hatred toward drunken or careless drivers softened . Maybe the Indian wasn't too much at fault , Ramey thought . Maybe he was only doing the best he knew how , like any of us . Anyway , he doesn't deserve to lie there in the sun and be stared at . `` Ever see yourself spread out on the pavement , Benny '' ? ? He said to his partner . `` You mean dream '' ? ? `` Not exactly . Just see it '' . Benson grinned and flipped a rock with his thumb like a marble . `` Nope , just you , all the time -- sometimes I think it's the only way I'll ever get a decent partner '' . Ramey smiled but he thought to himself , I always see me too . Never Benny . Whenever he saw someone lying in the dirt , Ramey wondered what the person had been thinking and he would try out thoughts in his own mind . Then he would realize they were really things that only he himself could think . With this realization , sometimes , he saw himself as he looked down . `` You seen him yet '' ? ? Benson said , referring to the Indian . `` He wasn't in the car '' , Ramey said . `` You didn't go clear around '' , Benson said . `` If you want to see something , he's back on the other side by the trunk of the car '' . `` Too long a waiting line '' , Ramey answered , pretending to joke . A few minutes later the insurance man , a road checker , drove up in the gray coupe with license plates on it from a far-away state . It was a trick they used to try and conceal their identity when they followed trucks to check their speed . Sometimes they just parked at the side of the road and used radar on the trucks as they passed . All the drivers knew about the plates and they also knew about the big floppy straw hat with shredded edges , the kind natives in travel ads wear when they are out joyfully chopping cane . Horsely , an agent on the east end , wore the hat , trying to look like a tourist . It had always seemed strange to Ramey that to disguise himself as a tourist , an ex-truck driver like Horsely would merely pick something outlandish and put it on his head . The insurance man informed them that he had talked to Crumley who was all right and that he would watch the men's personal effects until they towed the rig back to town . He chatted with Ramey and Benson for a minute or so in the meager shade of the trailer . Every so often the diminishing sound of a car came under the trailer as it slowed down for the wreck then speeded up again as it got clear . When they were ready to leave , Benson and Ramey walked back around the rear of the trailer . `` There's a body you won't mind looking at '' , Benson said and they stopped . She had driven up with her husband in a convertible with Eastern license plates , although the two drivers knew nothing at the moment about that . She wore shorts and a loose terry-cloth shirt . Slender and tanned , her dark brown hair was drawn straight back , simply . `` What outfit does she drive for '' ? ? Benson said . Seeing her caused a lurch in Ramey , a recognition . She might have been someone he had once loved . He had never seen her before , but now he thought of the manner in which he and Benson went in and out of the cities , at each end of their run . The truck routes , the industrial areas with walls grimed with diesel smoke passed briefly through his mind -- back alleys were their access to a city and they could never stay . How would you ever see her again ? ? The feeling subsided , it was only a small yearning . Their work was lonely . `` What's she doing in this bunch '' ? ? Benson said , and Ramey wondered how close their thoughts might have been . The girl looked around at the countryside . Her glance swung past the trailer where the two drivers were standing . It made only a tiny bump over the two men like a tire over a piece of gravel then moved on . She began to watch a blonde-haired man , also in shorts , standing right at the rear of the wrecked car in the one spot that most of the crowd had detoured slightly . What had caught his attention was obscured by the car itself , so that neither the girl nor the truck drivers could see , but Benson knew what it was . The girl took a couple of steps toward the man in shorts when Benson , in that barefoot courtliness Ramey could never decide was real , said , `` You don't want to go around there , Ma'am '' . The girl stopped but did not turn her head or acknowledge that someone had spoken to her . The man stood near the bent levi-clad body of the Indian who lay face down almost under the car . The two drivers moved closer . `` What does he want , a spoon '' ? ? Benson said to Ramey . One tiny detail in a happening can clog the memory and stick like meat in a crooked tooth , while the rest of the occurrence will go hazy and uncertain . With Ramey it was a dusty work shoe that was half-off the Indian's foot that he would always remember . The laces were broken at the bottom of the eyelets but there was still a bow knot at the top . The slightest twitch would have parted the shoe entirely from the foot , yet the toes were still inside . The two men in overalls stood just behind the blonde-headed man . He wore tennis shorts and a white sweater with a red V at the neck , the sleeves pushed above the elbows . He turned and looked at them with clear blue eyes , immaculate eyes . He was very tanned -- big hands might have torn him from a Coca-Cola poster . `` He's dead , isn't he '' ? ? The man said . He turned and bent over the body of the Indian . There was nothing in particular on the man's face . It was simply a matter of curiosity , a natural right to examine . `` What's this '' ? ? The man said , backing up a step , still looking down . His words were mostly to himself . `` Don't '' . There was a gentle concern in Benson's voice . Ramey looked down and saw the white sneaker at the bottom of the man's tanned leg cautiously nudge a bit of folded , blood-flecked substance lying by itself on the pavement . `` But what is it '' ? ? The man said with a tone of impatience . But what is it ? ? The man had spoken only once . Ramey heard the words again inside , weakened , the way moving water sounds through a grove of trees , until he was not sure whether it was sound or light-headedness pressing in his ears . The sneaker reached out once more to tap against the mass and Ramey's vision darkened except for an unreasonable clarity of the man's leg . Ramey saw sunlight touch the curly blonde hairs on the brown skin . He stared at the shining , shining circles of hairs and heard the voice of his partner through trees , `` Don't do that , fella . Them's brains '' . The man seemed to sink a little as Ramey brought the tire iron down on his shoulder and it seemed that the blonde head was turning as he hit the man again , with his fist . Ramey swung and caught the man just to the left of his mouth . It was a straight , solid , once-in-a-lifetime shot ; ; he laid all four knuckles in between the man's cheekbone and his chin . Ramey's fist and the air expelled from the man's collapsing cheek made a hollow pop in the air like cupped hands clapping together . The man took two short steps backward then sat down heavily on the pavement . Ramey heard a cry from the girl and felt a slight pain somewhere in his hand . As he watched the man sit suddenly , a detached part of his mind observed how very difficult it was , really , to knock a man off his feet . He hadn't done it this time and he would never again hit anyone so hard . With a thoughtful look , the man sat on the pavement , legs straight out in front of him . His arms hung like empty shirt sleeves , and his mouth was slightly open . After what seemed several seconds , the open mouth grew dark inside then blood began to ooze from it . The man brought one hand up slowly and the fingers fumbled across his face until he touched his mouth . He moaned and pulled the hand away . Even yet there was no realization in his eyes . Ramey could hear the crowd coming up rapidly behind him and the questioning voices coming over his shoulder had no identity or importance to him . He did not look around . `` What happened '' ? ? Someone said . `` He's hurt '' ! ! A woman's voice said , and then he heard a sort of wail from the man's wife . The man on the ground began to move ; ; one of his hands flattened out on the pavement and supported him . Blood dripped down the front of his sweater , soaking into a dark streak of dirt that ran diagonally across the white wool on his shoulder , as though the bright V woven into the neckline had melted , running a darker color . The girl kneeled by her husband with one arm at his back . `` Can you hear , can you talk to me '' ? ? She begged . An incoherent , puzzled sound came from the red mouth . The girl looked around quickly at several of the people . None of the crowd had stepped forward to help . Then she saw Ramey and her face was misshapen with bewilderment . `` Why did you do it -- why did you hit him '' ? ? She said , her voice rising . Ramey said nothing . A shine in her eyes suddenly became tears and she turned back to her husband again . Behind Ramey feet scraped beneath sharp questioning whispers . No one seemed to know for sure what had happened , nor was there any purpose or responsibility in the muttering feet and urgent voices behind the driver , beyond finding out . Ramey looked around and caught sight of his partner near the front end of the wrecked truck talking to the patrolman . Benson moved his arms , gesturing with an unfamiliar vigor and talking rapidly . Ramey caught a glimpse of the insurance man . Some of the ruddiness was gone from his face and he stared at Ramey . It's all over now , the driver thought as he saw the patrolman turn and walk rapidly down along the trailer toward them . Ramey watched him coming with a vision as clean as the glare on the metal sides of the trailer . He saw the dark sweat spots flip in and out of sight under the patrolman's swinging arms and in the leather holster that swaggered and rolled at the side of his stocky body , the sun left a smoky shine on the narrow strip of blue metal that ran between the horned handles of his pistol . `` All right , step back '' ! ! The patrolman said to no one in particular as he pushed between the fat man in the baseball cap and a young boy in levis . He walked straight up to the man sitting on the ground and bent over to look at him . `` You all right '' ? ? `` Mough -- it's my mough '' , the man said , trying to talk without moving his lips . His brown face looked gray from dirt streaks where his hand had come off the dusty pavement and rubbed across it . Then he calmly and carefully slugged the remaining five shots into the venomous head -- caught in the wicker back of the chair , the eyes dead on him as the life finally went out of the brute . The body continued to lash , but now Keith used the legs of the chair to fork the loathsome , bloody mass out of the bungalow . He slammed the door and listened as his servants ran up , alarmed at the sound of the shots . He heard their chattering , and then the sounds of hacking as they dismembered the snake right on the porch with wood axes . It was only then that he turned to look at Penny . She was sitting on the edge of the bed again , back in the same position where the snake had found her . The fear had not entirely gone from her face , but there were some other emotions now , crowding into her eyes and the lines of her mouth . But her hands were calm , now . She's got guts , thought Keith . She's got more guts than any other woman in the world . `` Keith '' , said Penny , `` Keith , you were wonderful . I don't suppose a wife should be grateful to her husband for saving her life , but I am . Thank you , Keith '' . He smiled at her sincerity . And for the hundredth time that week , he was startled at her beauty . Strange . Seven years they'd been married . He knew her mind pretty well , by now , its quick perceptions and sympathies , its painful insistence on truth and directness , its capacity for love almost too deep for a man to reciprocate , even in part . But her beauty always surprised him anew . `` I realize that this is hardly the time to say it , Penny '' , said Keith . `` But knowing you , I know that you're glad to be alive , and grateful -- and sorry because I killed the snake , even though I had to . Isn't that so '' ? ? Penny lowered her eyes . `` Yes '' , she said , almost in a whisper , as if admitting to a crime . `` The snake was beautiful , wasn't it '' ? ? Asked Keith , his voice getting harsher in spite of himself , as he struggled to control his growing anger . `` It was a king cobra , the largest you ever saw , and it deserved to live out its life in the jungle , didn't it ? ? didn't it ? ? '' Penny did not answer . Now , she just sat there looking at him , without an expression except concern for him . `` We're all God's creatures , aren't we '' ? ? Keith was snarling now . `` All of us -- every goddam roach and worm and killer in that jungle . You love this village and these stinking brown people because they're God's creatures , too . And you love Ahmiri , that black bastard of a servant even a little more , because he's a beautiful man . And he loves you because you're a beautiful woman . We're all God's creatures , aren't we , Penny ? ? All of us , that is , except me . You hate me , you hate my guts , because I like to hunt . You actually hate me -- and we both know it -- because I killed that filthy snake . Well , why don't you say something '' ? ? Penny would not rise to his mood . `` There isn't anything left to say , is there , Keith '' ? ? She softly let herself into the bed , and took her regular side , away from the door , where she slept better because Keith was between her and the invader . He knew she was not sulking , not even angry at him . Just as he knew that she had stopped loving him . The Brahmaputra has its headwaters in the tableland of the world , the towering white headwalls of the Himalayas that are unknown to man as any other space on the planet . For a brief period each year , the rays of the sun are warm enough to melt some of the snows piled a mile deep at the base of the headwalls , and then the pinnacles glisten in the daytime at high noon , and billions of gallons of water begin their slow seepage under the glaciers and across the rockstrewn hanging valleys on their long , meandering journey to the sea -- running east past the sky-carving massifs of Gurla Mandhata and Kemchenjunga , then turning south and curling down through the jungles of Assam , past the Khasi Hills , and into Bengal , past Sirinjani and Madaripur , until the hard water of the melting snows mingles with the soft drainage of fields and at length fans out to meld with the teeming salt depths of the Bay of Bengal . Keith Sterling had looked down on the Brahmaputra more times than he could remember , during the war days when he flew over the Hump of the world , thinking it high adventure in those times before man was guiding himself through outer space . But Keith looked down more than up . He thought of the jungles below him , and of the wild , strange , untracked beauty there and he promised himself that someday he would return , on foot perhaps , to hunt in this last corner of the world where man is sometimes himself the hunted , and animals the lords . At first it had been just a romantic dream of his , the same as the idea of finishing Oxford after the war . But `` after the war '' was a luxury of a phrase he did not permit himself . Wing Commanders in the RAF do not imply survival in the future either in their orders or in their attitudes , to their men or to themselves . And Keith's record of kills made him a man to listen to -- a man paradoxically , who might even survive . He became a fighter pilot after the stint over the Hump in the big crates . The RAF was Britain's weapon of attrition , and flying a fighter plane was the way her sons could serve her best at this point in the war . He knew how to shoot down Nazis . And he knew that the men talked about him behind his back , saying that he was one up on everybody else -- including the pilot of the plane with the swastika on it -- because he was chemically incapable of fear . That was true , but only half the truth . The other half he didn't like to recognize , even to himself . He enjoyed the killing . Not defending England , or being an ace , or fighting for humanity . He enjoyed killing . And he would have enjoyed it just as much if he had been a Nazi . Nowadays , we talk as though the blitz were just a short skirmish . The Nazis bombed Britain , so the RAF retaliated and shot them all down . Not quite . It was a war of nerves , of stamina , of dogged endurance in which the stupid insistence of the British on their right to their own country became ultimately an unsurmountable obstacle to the Nazis , who were better organized and technically superior . It took a long time before the British tipped the balance . Keith learned too much about air combat , and air killing , to be risked . They grounded him ( over his protests -- not including his true reason for wanting to fly ) and put him in the Command offices . That was where he met Penny . He was aware of her as a frightfully good-looking American WAC , a second lieutenant assigned to do the paper work , ( regardless of how important she might have thought she was ) in the Command offices , but that was all . Penny knew him better , on her part . He had a war reputation , but this was the kind of man women like even without medals . They don't go for bull-like muscle , as a rule . He had strength in his six-foot frame , but it was like the tensile steel in a rapier . He was on the thin side , with big hands , and the kind of wrists that give away the power in forearm and bicep . His hair was black , already greying at the temples in the classic beauty-idiom , the only one permitted to a man . The pretty little twittering WACS said he had the look of eagles -- and Penny , hating the cliche , had to admit that in this case it applied . Keith was an eagle . Penny and Keith had no romance . No dates or hand-holding . But they met in one searing moment that gave them to one another instantly . The Command offices were in the border country , up north , where the radar systems centralized their intelligence reports , and the fighters were dispatched to harry the enemy . The Nazis knew this , of course , and while their chief quarry was the industrial centers , they let a few drop every time they went over , hoping for a lucky hit . This time , they had been lucky . The Command post was underground , and well camouflaged . But there hadn't been enough time to build it for keeps . There was a measure of protection in its concrete walls and ceiling , but the engineers who hastily installed it were well aware that concrete is not much better than prayer , if as efficacious , when a direct hit comes along . This one was actually more of a `` near miss '' . The bomb plunged into the ground near the Post , but not precisely into the Command room itself . There was a shattering , cracking sound as the concrete started to buckle , the air filled with dust and flying debris , and everyone in the room -- men and women hit the floor and used the desks as turtlebacks , as ordered . That is , everyone but Keith and Penny . They stood there , just the two of them , in the rocking , shattering blast . Keith was on his feet because he didn't care at all about life any more : Penny on her feet , proudly , because she cared too much . The bomb was a solitary one . The blast damaged , but did not destroy the room . Keith's eyes met Penny's as they stood there in this strange marriage of destruction . And , as the others began to crawl out from beneath the desks and tend to those wounded , and mark the several killed , he climbed across the debris to Penny and took her hand in his . The chaplain married them , on the next day . After the war , Penny had wanted Keith at least to visit her home with her . She came from Ohio , from what she called a `` small farm '' of two hundred acres , as indeed it was to farmer-type farmers . But to Keith's London-bred mind , such acreage sounded rather invincible . It wasn't that , however , which decided them not to go to America . Keith told Penny about his dream to return to India and Burma . He stressed the wild beauty of the mountains , and the jungles . He didn't tell her the truth he now freely admitted to himself . He couldn't stop killing . That was his true love , not Penny . The terrible power of a gun , the thing that blasted the soul out of a living body , man or beast , was one he never wanted to lose . And in the hunting land , this hunger was considered to be a noble thing . When they got to Shillong , in Assam , he was happy . This is a paradise for hunters . This was the land of the sladang , the great water buffalo with horns forty inches across the spread . The great black leopards . The sambur buck , the jungle stag that is even more noble than the Scottish elk . He even hunted elephant , although the Asian elephant is not quite as ferocious as his African cousin . But there are big rogues in both countries . These were the ones Keith sought out -- the loners , the ones who killed for the joy of it , like himself . He and Penny would go out on tame elephants , raised from babyhood in the keddah . And while he was ever alert for game , and most particularly a tiger , Penny marvelled at the Eden they were traversing . They came upon cheetal deer at woodland pools . Peacocks strutted across their path , preening . There were fantastic flowers without perfume , and gaudy birds without song . Mouse deer played around the feet of the elephants , or fled when the mighty legs thrashed too close . Wild boar watched their progress with little pig eyes , and grunted derision when they didn't consider such game worthy of a shot from the . Now , the next morning , they were anchored at The Elbow and the boat was riding directly over the underwater ledge where the green water turned to deepest blue and the cliff dropped straight down 600 fathoms , with the weighted line beside it ; ; and Robinson Roy , who had gone down this line ten minutes before to set a new depth record for the free dive , was already back on the surface . He and his safety man , Herr Schaffner , swam up to the boarding ladder together . The German courteously indicated that Robinson should mount first . Robinson clambered heavily into the boat , sat down , and stripped off his triple-tank assembly . He was frowning . He took his mask from his forehead and threw it , unexpectedly , across the deck . `` Temper , temper '' , Mrs. Forsythe said , laughing uneasily . A phony blonde hanging onto a bygone youth and beauty , but irreparably stringy in the neck , she was already working on her second gin and tonic , though it was not yet ten A.M. `` I loused it '' , Rob said , with a savage note in his voice . `` All I have to do to set the record is to go on down . So instead I come up '' . `` Was it my equipment '' ? ? The German asked . `` Was it something went bad with the breathing '' ? ? `` The equipment was fine '' , Rob stated , standing up . He was a huge young man of twenty-four , clothed in muscle , immensely strong , with a habitual gentleness and diffidence of manner that was submerged under his present agitation . He stared stonily at the floor . `` I was down to 275 . I've been that far half a dozen times . I don't get it why this time I should pull such a stupid trick '' . `` Well , I get it '' , Artie said , still on the ladder . `` You are a big muscle-bound ape and you got this idea about setting a record . And you also got this little spark in your bird-brain that tells you to turn around before you drown yourself . So you turn around '' . `` No , it wasn't that '' , Rob said . A note of awe came into his voice . `` When I came up , damnit , I thought I was going down . I came up maybe fifty feet before I knew what was happening '' . `` Pressure-happy '' , Artie said , and climbed in . `` That's right '' , Robinson said . `` I was expecting it , sure . But when it happens to you like that , I tell you , and you're a hundred feet from where you thought you were -- well , it makes you think . You don't head back down again . Not me , anyway . Not right away '' . He had his voice under control again : no one became aware that he was terrified by what had just happened to him . Waddell , the newspaperman , was a fellow in his middle forties , with a graying crewcut , heavy-framed glasses , and a large jaw padded with fat . Now he was going to show how much he knew . `` Our boy didn't chicken out , no sir . He ran into the rapture of the depths . Nitrogen narcosis . It makes the diver feel drunk '' . `` Well , that's the only way to be '' , Mrs. Forsythe said , and gave her brassy laugh . `` Maybe not , if you're 200 feet under water '' , Artie said . `` Anyway '' , Waddell went on . `` It's nothing to fool with . It can kill you . Personally , I don't blame him for giving up the dive , much as I regret losing the story '' . `` Nobody's giving anything up '' , Robinson said . He stood there , towering over them all : gentle , mighty , determined , the moving force in the group ; ; and yet like a child among adults . `` You think I got you and Artie and Herr Schaffner all the way out here just for the boat ride ? ? I'm going down again '' . `` That's my boy '' ! ! Mr. Forsythe exclaimed . `` Rob's not going to give up as easy as all that '' . He was a florid , puffy man in his early sixties , very natty in his yachting cap , striped jacket and white flannels . He went to Key West every fall and winter and was the only man in town who did not know that his title of `` Commodore '' was never used without irony . Old Commodore Forsythe , who had once lost a fifty-dollar bet on whether he could get both motors started and turn on the running lights without accidentally turning on something else first . Now it did not occur to him even to wonder whether it was wise for Robinson to dive again : Rob was his boy , the kid he had rescued from the streets , the object of his pride . `` Why '' , he went on , `` when Rob asked me if he could make his dive on this trip , I didn't think twice about it . I've helped him along ever since he was a youngster hanging around his brother's tackle shop . Hell , I gave him the first decent job he ever had , six , seven -- how many years ago was it , Rob '' ? ? `` Seven years ago , Commodore '' , Rob said impassively . He was thinking , big deal : skipper on his drunken fishing parties for seven years and no better off than when I started . `` Excuse me '' , he said abruptly . He went down the steps to the galley and sleeping quarters ; ; went into the forward stateroom and locked the door behind him . `` When you gotta go , you gotta go '' , Mrs. Forsythe said . Waddell muttered something about taking a look around and climbed up to the flying bridge . He was disturbed by what had happened on the dive and by what he remembered of a conversation he had had the night before with the German , who had come out of the head while he was fixing himself a drink in the galley . `` Hi there , Schaffner '' , he had said . `` Can I make you one '' ? ? `` No thank you very much '' , Schaffner had answered in his accented English . `` I do not drink so much , thank you '' . Waddell had looked the man over , trying to size him up . He was in his early forties , rather short and very compactly built , and with a manner that was reserved and stiff despite his efforts to adapt himself to American ways . His open face seemed to promise a sort of innocence , until one looked into his eyes , which had no warmth in them but only alert intelligence . Waddell had heard that he had been a commando in Rommel's Afrika Corps , and he said to himself : I'd hate to run into him in the desert on a dark night . Aloud he had said , making conversation : `` Rob tells me he's using your Atlantis equipment on the dive '' . `` Yes '' , Herr Schaffner had said . `` He's one hell of a decent boy . I like that kid '' . `` I agree , yes '' . `` And if the dive goes OK he has the exclusive import rights to your line for this country , is that right '' ? ? `` Well , no '' , Herr Schaffner said . Waddell turned to face him . `` No '' ? ? He asked . `` But that's what he told me . Why , that's his main reason for making the dive '' . Shaffner looked at him , altogether without guile , and shrugged his shoulders , making a little spreading gesture with his two hands . `` What do you mean '' ? ? Waddell asked , frowning . `` Please let me explain '' , the German said earnestly , his face still devoid of deceit . `` I have in Europe a gross business of seven million dollars the year . Now I wish to enter the American market , where the competition is very strong . I must have a powerful representative here , a firm with a national distribution and ten , twenty thousand dollars to advertise my products . With all respect to a fine young man , Mr. Roy is not able to provide these necessaries '' . Waddell was not an eminently moral person , but he did not like what he had just heard . `` Did you tell him all this '' ? ? He asked . `` Perhaps not in so many words '' , the German said . `` But surely you have misunderstood Mr. Roy . Never , never did I offer him the exclusive rights . We spoke of the need for advertising , and I agreed that the deep dive would be most useful for publicity . He was most eager to make the dive ; ; of course , I was willing . But there was no definite agreement about business arrangements '' . `` Well , damn '' , Waddell said . There was the end of his front-page feature story , with byline . He started out the door . `` One moment '' ! ! Herr Schaffner said . `` You intend to speak with Mr. Roy '' ? ? `` What else '' ? ? Waddell asked . `` If you will pardon , I think it would be better if not . Mr. Roy is determined to make this dive . Whatever you tell him he will dive . I know this from my talks with him '' . `` Well , let's let him make up his own mind , OK '' ? ? Waddell said . `` On the basis of the facts '' . `` You will make him unhappy and anxious '' , the German said . `` At 200 , 300 , 400 feet under the water , when he must be paying very much attention , he will be thinking about what you are telling him . It is not good , Mr. Waddell : you will do him great harm '' . There was no doubt that Herr Schaffner meant every word of what he said . Waddell came back from the door and sat on a bunk . `` I am an honest man '' , the German said with fervor . `` I will give Mr. Roy his due for this dive . I will make him distributor for all of Florida -- a big market . All tourists come to Florida . This will help him to get out of his little tackle shop . Yes ! ! But there is no use causing him to worry at this time '' . The German's words worked on the newspaperman like a reprieve from an odious duty . He took a big swig of his drink . It would be a colossal shame to throw away a story like this . `` I think maybe you're right , Schaffner '' , he said . `` He has the distributorship for Florida , you say '' ? ? `` Yes '' , the German said . `` At least for South Florida '' . `` By God '' , Waddell said , `` we don't want to upset the boy at this time of all times . I guess you're right '' . He sloshed his drink around and drained it in a few large gulps . The story was shaping up nicely in his mind : the young pioneer , as of old , altruistically braving the unknown ; ; the rewards prompt and juicy in modern big-business America . `` Join me in another '' ? ? He had asked . `` Thank you '' , the German had said courteously . `` I do not drink so much '' . Now , in that same cabin , Robinson fell to his knees beside a bunk . Fear and relief mingled in his churning emotions . He pressed his palms together and addressed himself to the patron saint of divers in a hurried and anxious whisper . `` Blessed Saint Nicholas , I thank thee for getting me out of that mess and sending me up instead of down when I was bewildered . And when I make the dive again '' -- He paused ; ; crossed himself ; ; said a Hail Mary , slowly and with understanding . Folding between his hands the cross that hung from his neck , he took his appeal direct to Headquarters . `` Holy Mary , Mother of God , Star of the Sea , stay Thou with me on this next dive . Make it come off all right . Let me set the record this time , and let me get back OK , so the German will give me the exclusive . And make my life different and better from this time on . Amen '' . He crossed himself again and rose . He felt a good deal less shaky . As he reached for the door there was a knock on it and when he opened he found Artie , who came in and sat down on a bunk . Artie had picked up a snorkle and was twirling it on his forefinger . He waited awhile before he said , `` Roy , you know your decompression table , don't you '' ? ? `` You know I know it '' , Robinson answered warily . `` You came straight up from 275 without a stop '' , Artie said . `` Well , I was a little bit confused . Anyway , I wasn't down long enough to matter . You don't see me stretched out on the deck , do you '' ? ? `` You know what they say about two deep dives in one day '' , Artie went on , still twirling the snorkle and studying it intently . `` I don't think you should go down again '' . Early that day Matsuo saw a marine . The enemy came looming around a bend in the trail and Matsuo took a hasty shot , then fled without knowing the result , ran until breath was a pain in his chest and his legs were rubbery . As his feet slowed , he felt ashamed of the panic and resolved to make a stand . He crossed the next meadow and climbed a tree where the jungle trail resumed . In the leafiest part of the tree , straddling a broad horizontal limb , he could see over the meadow . For a while he was content to let events develop in their good time . He had no doubt the marine was the lead scout of a column , and while his shot had probably bred indecision , they would soon come hunting . His superiors had emphasized that marines tortured others for the sheer pleasure . Yesterday ; ; today ; ; tomorrow : no surrender . His remembering the self-dictate brought no peace -- only a faint chill of doubt . He murmured to himself , with firmness : `` No surrender '' . It was best to die fighting the marines . His superiors had also preached this , saying it was the way for eternal honor . What if the marines never came ? ? His comrades were all dead . He had no rice . Then it would be a choice between starvation and suicide . Whichever the way , he would rot in this vast choking green , his wife never to receive an urn of his ashes . He sighed and leaned for a moment against the trunk . His fingers touched the bone handle of a knife . The knife , an ammunition pouch , and a half-filled bottle of purified water hung on his belt . Besides the belt he wore a loin cloth . As he looked up from picking at a leg ulcer , he saw a marine in the jungle across the clearing . Gloom receded . The marine came to the edge of the green jungle mist and stayed , as though debating whether to brave the sunlight . His fatigues made a streak of almost phosphorescent green in the mist . `` Come out , come out in the meadow '' , Matsuo said under his breath . The man leaned against a tree and wiped a sleeve across his face . A signal ? ? Matsuo lifted his rifle , easing the sling under his left upper arm for steadiness . Fresh on his mind were events of the past day when his whole regiment was destroyed in the hills . They had fought from caves , and the marines resorted to burning them out . Even now , like a ringing in his ears , he heard the wooooosh of flame-throwers squirting great orange billows . A wave of flame rippling through their cave had reached Nagamo , his friend , and with a shriek the man bolted through the entrance , then slowed to the jerky walk of a puppet , his uniform blazing . The marines let him advance . When he sank on his knees , they had allowed him to char without administering the stroke of mercy . Matsuo had faked death and was pitched on a stack of corpses , both the burned and the unburned , the latter decomposing rapidly under the tropical sun . The callous marines had laughed at each other's retching , while stacking bodies . Matsuo repeatedly choked down his own nausea . At nightfall he had been able to sneak down a hillside and into the jungle , reeking of death . Apprehensively he peered to the left , to the right into the leafy , vine-crisscrossed maze . He decided that the marines must be deploying around the meadow , with the one left to distract him . He strained his hearing . Cautious feet stepping on leafmold ; ; faint creaking of belts and slings ; ; whispers : he heard none of these . Only the hum of insects and the distant fluttering call of a bird . Because he couldn't hear them , he was more convinced they were there . A spectacle occurred across the meadow : the lone marine took a seat on the ground ; ; leaning sidewise on a tree trunk , he embraced it . Humiliation made Matsuo tremble . While his comrades cocked the trap , that one behaved as if it was some dull maneuver . Taking aim at the man's face , Matsuo squeezed the trigger up to the point of discharge , and then he changed his mind . He wanted the arrogant marine to know fear , and so he aimed above the head . The shot reverberated in diminishing whiplashes of sound . Hush followed . Like a mischievous boy expecting punishment , Matsuo awaited reaction from the jungle . How stupid to give his position away . The jungle did not retort . The sitter remained seated hugging the tree . Before long the atmosphere reverted to its old normalcy , and insects hummed and birds occasionally called . Matsuo puzzled and grew anxious over the complete passiveness , concluding that he was the butt of a devilish joke . Five or so minutes later the marine abruptly pulled up and stepped into sunlight , immediately throwing his hands over his eyes . He went into a whirling dance , a sort of blind chasing of the tail . It ended when he tumbled ; ; but jumping right up , he staggered in no particular direction . He wore no head cover of any kind and , more odd , had no visible weapon . With a sudden decisiveness he lurched in Matsuo's direction , crossing the meadow in a zigzagging gallop . When he got closer to the tree , Matsuo noted the wild look on his face . The pockets of his jacket bulged . Hand grenades . The bobbing head was a poor target , so Matsuo shot him in the upper trunk . The marine spun , clapping a hand high on his chest , and dived forward . In the hush that followed the echoes , Matsuo was tense . They could come on him now without difficulty . Gradually he reached a conclusion . The marine was alone , for they were impatient people and by now would have vied to knock him from the tree . Down the tree he scrambled and knelt at the edge of foliage . The marine was sprawled some thirty yards away , one arm extended . Matsuo jumped when the hidden arm flopped out . Reflex ? ? Rifle leveled on the man , he made a rush . Heat , in the sunlight , pressed in like an invisible crowd . He squatted by the head , gently placing the rifle on the ground . With a snakestrike motion he grasped the hair , and , twisting , pulled the marine over on his back . He was bearded . The bullet had penetrated in the area of the right collarbone ; ; around the hole , blood glistened in a little patch . Maintaining his clutch on the hair , Matsuo watched the closed eyes while rummaging in the jacket pockets . In one : a package of cigarettes and a tinplated lighter , both sticky from the man's bleeding . In the other : a wristwatch with broken crystal wrapped in a dirty handkerchief . One by one he tossed the objects aside . He didn't smoke and could not light fires with a flintless lighter ; ; he had no use any longer for exact time , even had the watch been running . Then there was no saying how many times the marine had blown his nose on the handkerchief . Too bad the marine had no water . From its holder he took his own canteen . The cap was stuck and made a thin rusty squeaking as he applied pressure . The marine's eyes opened , squeezed shut , then opened squinted in the glare . So , alive . Matsuo put the bottle to his own lips . The marine reached up a hand . Matsuo shook his head . `` None for you '' . The marine blinked , soon dropping his hand . Not only had he no canteen , but he lacked even the belt to hang one on . `` You came well equipped to die '' . Some odor made him lean over the man . He sniffed and recognized it . Sake . So that had been his difficulty . Drunk on sake , he must have wandered off from his bivouac . The marine tried to roll on his right side , and moaned . When he rolled on the left side , propping on his left elbow , Matsuo seized his hair and pulled him back over . `` Be a good turtle '' . Awkwardly with one hand Matsuo got the cap back on the water bottle . The smell of sake had freshened yesterday's events in his thoughts . In the caves , with other supplies , they had kept cases of sake . The marine shut his eyes . `` Are you a thrower of flame , marine '' ? ? Matsuo took the small knife from its scabbard and laid it on the ground , out of the marine's reach and away from their shadows . He waited in his squat , gripping the hair . Every so often he turned the knife . Its blade was dazzling in the intense sunlight . The sun was noon high and Matsuo perspired until his body was dripping . Wet also were the marine's fatigues and the face had an oily film . The man had thrown the left hand over his eyes . Now and again he murmured something that ended in a giggle . He must have saturated himself in the drink , for the bullet not to shock him out of his drunken haze . Matsuo shook his head . Strange . At last he reached for the knife . Even the bone handle scorched , and he retrieved the marine's handkerchief to wrap it . First he barely touched the blade on the hand which shaded the eyes . The marine yelled and flung the hand away . With a firm grip on the man's hair Matsuo applied the blade flat on a cheek . A shrill yelp , kicked legs , and groping hands that circled Matsuo's wrist . Matsuo wrenched free and burned the hands into retreat ; ; burned the other cheek ; ; burned each hand when they came groping again . The marine commenced to weep and it blighted the sense of enjoyment . Matsuo stood up . `` A small measure of payment , marine '' . He dropped the knife in its scabbard , hung the rifle behind a shoulder . The marine , hands on cheeks , rolled by his unwounded side onto his stomach . He ceased weeping . Matsuo walked toward his tree , once glancing back . The marine was still . He would soon die . As Matsuo climbed by using the vines and kicking his feet against the trunk , a mood of gloom immersed him like a jungle shadow . What now ? ? In the jungle , birds were mute , while insects preserved only the monotony of living . Someone called . It was the marine : head lifted , he strained and called . Then he astonished Matsuo by pushing and dragging himself until he sat . He cupped his mouth and yelled . Matsuo hustled the rifle off his shoulder . Once and for all he'd finish this marine who would not die . He aimed , but listened . It sounded as if the man were calling him : `` Hey , Japanese hey there , Japanese '' . The man tilted back his head and went through the pantomime of drinking from a container . He performed the act twice more , and the begging in his tone grew more distinct . `` Sake '' ? ? Matsuo called . The marine nodded vigorously . Matsuo laughed , slung the rifle . The marine was a winehead . His superiors had said that all marines were depraved . The marine slumped forward into a bow like a priest before an idol . Remembering his own thirst , Matsuo took out his water bottle . One swallow was all he would have ; ; he was very thirsty , but he must observe water discipline . His years of campaigning had taught him the value of water discipline . He began to uncap the bottle , the rusty cap squealing on its threads . Popping upright , the marine waved both hands and shouted . Of course it was water he really craved ; ; down in the broil of the sun he was becoming dried out . The marine shouted for it until it seemed that his voice had to crack . Matsuo shook his head . He had no water for an enemy . And when this was gone , he hadn't even a little bitter tablet to purify other water if he were to discover some stagnant jungle pool . He capped the bottle and replaced it . After all , he had less reason to desire it than the marine . Before much longer the marine quieted down . His head slumped . The upper part of his packet had stained dark . `` Marine . There is nothing for you '' , Matsuo said . `` Your superiors will certainly beat you for your desertion , besides the dishonor of it . I've nothing for you '' . From the convulsive quivers of the man's shoulders it was plain he had resumed the weeping . He reminded Matsuo of a similar thing he had witnessed in China . In China it was a baby sitting on a railroad platform , smudged , blood-specked , with the village burning about him and shells exploding . Chairs scraped back and customers hastily vacated their tables as the tall young buffalo hunter pushed open the swing doors and walked towards the bar . Only Blue Throat and his gang stayed where they were . Blue Throat was slumped with his back against the bar , elbows supporting his massive frame . He leered at the stranger as the distance between them closed . `` Since when did they allow beardless kids into the saloon bars of this town , boys '' ? ? He asked . `` Seems to me I don't remember altering any law about that '' . He straightened up , alert now as the buffalo hunter came closer . `` Stay right here where you are , kid '' , he called . `` I don't aim to have minors breathing down my neck when I'm a-drinking '' : The stranger ignored him . He didn't stop till he was within three feet of Blue Throat and by that time the gang leader's right hand was on the butt of his revolver . `` I'm Billy Tilghman '' , said the stranger , `` and I've come for Pat Conyers' body '' . `` And what makes you think you're going to get it , pretty boy '' ? ? `` Because I'm asking . Most of the time I get what I ask for '' . Blue Throat winked at his six cronies . `` The kid has no manners , boys . Shall we teach him some '' ? ? His gun was half drawn when he asked the question , but the weapon never left its holster . Tilghman's clenched fist swept over in a terrific right cross and clipped the big gunfighter on the side of his chin . His head snapped round and he reeled back , crashing into the table where his buddies were sprawling . Tilghman leapt on to him , dragged him upright and hit him again , this time sending him careening against the bar . A bullet gouged into the bar top an inch from Tilghman's stomach as Blue Throat's henchmen started shooting . Tilghman flung himself aside , dropped on one knee and pulled his own gun . The Colt roared twice and two men dropped , writhing . A third shot doused the light . Somewhere at the far end of the room a voice yelled , `` You all right , Billy '' ? ? `` Yes , George , but I ain't got poor old Pat's body yet . And I aim to have it '' . He fired again , and somewhere in the gloom a man screamed . Another took off his gun belt and flung his weapons to the floor . `` OK , Tilghman , I'm quitting '' . `` And me '' , said another Blue Throat henchman . Somebody brought a light . Tilghman and his partner , George Rust , herded the men into a corner . `` And now '' , said Tilghman with deadly calm , `` I'll repeat what I said . I've come for Pat Conyers' body '' . In two minutes the body of Tilghman's former comrade , who had been killed by Blue Throat in a gambling brawl the previous night , was carried into the town's funeral parlor to be prepared for decent burial . Blue Throat , nursing an aching jaw and a collosal dose of wounded pride , rode out of town with the survivors of the fight . `` That critter will be back tomorrow '' , predicted George Rust , `` and he'll bring fifty of his kind back with him . Blue Throat won't stand for this . He'll shoot up the town '' . The prediction was correct . The Reverend James Doran had scarcely completed Pat Conyers' last rites on Boot Hill in the township of Petrie , when shots were heard in the distance . `` Amen '' , said the Reverend Doran , grabbing his rifle propped up against a tombstone , `` and now my brethren , it would seem that our presence is required elsewhere '' . Billy Tilghman and his comrades rode off to the battle . Blue Throat , who had ruled the town with his six-shooter for the last six months , certainly had no intention of relinquishing his profitable dictatorship . It was essential that he should restore his formidable reputation as a rip-roaring , ruthless gun-slinger , and this was the time-honored Wild West method of doing it . He rode in at the head of sixty trigger-happy and liquor-crazed desperadoes and took over a livery barn at the entrance to Main Street . The entire length of the street could be raked with rifle fire from this barn . Any posse riding down the street to demand Blue Throat's surrender would be wiped out with one deadly burst of fire . The law-abiding citizens of Petrie had gathered inside Kaster's Store , halfway down the street . Several were firing into the barn when Billy Tilghman arrived . He sized up the situation and shook his head . `` If Blue Throat has his way he'll keep us all cooped up in here for days '' , he said . `` There's only one thing to move him fast , and we have it right here in this very store '' . He called the store owner and together they went into the stockroom . Billy returned with six sticks of dynamite . `` I'm gonna drop these into Blue Throat's lap '' , he announced , `` and I'd like every gun to be firing into that barn while I get near enough to toss 'em through the window '' . He slipped outside , hugging the walls of buildings and dodging into doorways . Blue Throat's men spotted him and a hail of bullets splintered the store fronts and board walk as he passed . Fifty yards away from the barn he dodged inside a barber's shop and came out at the back . Here he couldn't be seen by Blue Throat and his gang . All he had to do was light the fuses of the dynamite sticks , run to within ten yards of an open window in the barn and hurl the sticks through . Billy Tilghman did just that . Within seconds the big barn was blasted into smoking splinters , with every outlaw either dead or injured inside . It was the abrupt end of Blue Throat's dictatorship in Petrie . Though only slightly injured himself the big hoodlum never returned to those parts . To Tilghman the incident was just one of a long list of hair-raising , smash-'em-down adventures on the side of the law which started in 1872 when he was only eighteen years old , and did not end till fifty years later when he was shot dead after warning a drunk to be quiet . Of all the rip-roaring two-fisted tough boys of the Old West , `` Uncle Billy Tilghman '' stands out head and shoulders . He was the lawman who survived more gunfights than any other famous gun-slinging character in the book . He saw the most action , beat up more badmen with his bare fists , broke up the most gangs and sent more murderers to the gallows than any other U.S. marshal who lived before or after him . For fifty years his guns and ham-like fists shot holes through and battered the daylights out of the enemies of law and order in the frontier towns of the West . The deeds of countless western bandits and outlaws have been glorified almost to the point of hero-worship , but because Billy Tilghman remained strictly on the side of the law throughout his action-packed career , his achievements and the appalling risks he took while taming the West have remained almost unsung . Citizens took the view that a lawman was expected to risk his life on the odd occasion anyway , but this fighting fury of a man risked it regularly over a period of half a century . He came within an ace of being riddled with bullets during his long fight with the Doolin gang which terrorized Oklahoma in the 1890's . Led by Bill Doolin , these mobsters specialized in train robberies but as a sideline they looted stores and robbed banks , making liberal use of their guns . Bill Doolin's ambition , it appeared , was to carve out his name with bullets alongside those of Jesse James and Billy the Kid , and Bill Tilghman had sworn he would stop him . Tilghman knew that some ranchers were hand-in-glove with the Doolin gang . They bought rustled cattle from the outlaw , kept him supplied with guns and ammunition , harbored his men in their houses . Billy decided to set an example by arresting one of the ranchers , named Ed Dunn , who lived at Rock Fort . On a bitterly cold day in January , 1895 , accompanied only by Neal Brown as his deputy , Tilghman left the township of Guthrie and headed for Rock Fort and Dunn's ranch . It was snowing hard when they got there and they saw no horses outside . The only evidence of occupation came from the chimney , which was belching out thick smoke . The two lawmen halted their wagon about twenty yards from the door . `` Wait here , Neal '' , said Tilghman . `` If I don't come out within half an hour ride back to town and bring out a posse '' . Leaving his rifle in the wagon , Tilghman walked up to the door and hammered on it . There was no reply so he shoved it open with his foot and stepped inside . Directly opposite the door was a roaring log fire , a welcome sight on that bitterly cold day . Seated near it with his back to the door was the rancher , Ed Dunn . `` Hello , Ed '' , said Tilghman . The rancher grunted an acknowledgement but didn't move . Tilghman closed the door behind him and walked towards the fire . Suddenly he saw something which made his big heart give a sickening lurch and caused the hairs to bristle on the back of his neck . Along each side of the room were six tiered bunks , each one screened off with a curtain . And projecting wickedly through these curtains were the gleaming muzzles of six rifles , all trained on Billy Tilghman . The fighting marshal had walked right into a trap and at any moment six slugs might slam into his hide . Thinking fast , Tilghman never hesitated for one instant . He walked right up to the fire as though blissfully unaware of the guns covering him . The men behind them were Bill Doolin and five of his gang -- every man a killer . `` Cold day '' , said Tilghman , placing his hands behind him and casually presenting his backside to the fire . `` Just dropped in to ask where Jed Hawkins lives . Can't seem to locate landmarks in this snow '' . The rancher was trembling . He wouldn't look Tilghman in the face . `` Follow the river for five miles '' , he said hoarsely . `` Jed's homestead is on the south bank '' . Resisting the overwhelming temptation to flng himself out of that bristling death-trap , Tilghman deliberately engaged the nervous rancher in trivial conversation for a good ten minutes . All that time rifle barrels were pointing unwaveringly at his head and body . One false move on his part and he would be a dead man . `` Well '' , he announced , `` Guess I'll be going now , Ed , and thanks for the warmup '' . He strolled back to the door , whistling softly , hands still clasped behind him . He left the house and almost certain death without even increasing his pace and wondered by what remarkable stroke of Providence he had been allowed to come out alive . But he knew well enough that those guns would still be trained on his back as he walked towards the wagon . If he showed signs of collecting his rifle and going back with his deputy to the ranch he would be shot down instantly . Leisurely he climbed on to the wagon next to Neal Brown . `` Don't say or do anything '' , he said softly . `` Just get out of here without it looking as though we're in a hurry . That place is crawling with Bill Doolin and his gang '' . Even as he spoke those words Billy Tilghman's life hung on a thread . Back in the house a hoodlum named Red Buck , sore because Billy had been allowed to leave unscathed , jumped from a bunk and swore he was going after him to kill him right then . `` You'll stay right here '' , commanded Bill Doolin , covering Red with his rifle . `` Billy Tilghman is too good a man to shoot in the back . We'll let him go '' . But the fighting marshal's fifty-year run of immunity from violent death came to a full and final stop one night in a street at Cromwell , Oklahoma , where he had been sent to clean up the gambling and vice rackets . Wiley Lynn , a self-styled prohibition officer , had hit town the previous day and had been drinking ever since . That night he reeled out of Ma Murphy's dance hall and proceeded to disturb the peace by shooting off his revolver . For several months now , Jack Carter , a big overgrown boy of fifteen with a fuzzy , pimpled face and greenish catlike eyes with a lot of red in them , had been haunted by a dream , a vision , of a Woman . This Woman had no distinct shape or size and no particular face , but she radiated warmth , a sweet warmth ; ; she would talk to him in a soothing voice about things his mother would have said were not nice and put her hands on him and kiss him passionately . When she would do these things , he would turn blind for an instant and become sick at his stomach . Then he would run to the toilet behind the house . Sometimes he did this three or four times a day , for this Woman was almost always with him . He would feel ashamed each time and wonder whether his mother and father knew -- thinking they might see it in his eyes or smell it on him . But they never said anything , so he figured it was all right . And so when Miss Langford came to teach at the one-room Chestnut school , where Jack was a pupil in the eighth grade , the Woman of Jack's mind assumed the teacher's face and figure . He could not keep his eyes off her when at school ; ; when he went home at night , he took her with him in his mind , and she did the things the anonymous Woman used to do , and he did the thing afterwards each time as he used to do . When he awoke in the mornings , she was in his mind and he could hardly wait to get to school to be near her in the flesh . Miss Langford ( her first name was Evelyn ) was an attractive girl . Tall , blonde , blue-eyes , fair , buxom without being heavy , she cut a fine figure of budding womanhood as she swished among the pupils in her fresh , starched summer dress . Something was beginning to stir and come alive in her , too ( it may have been there for a good while , since she was twenty now ; ; but if it had been , it had been smothered until now by fear ) : you could tell it by the way she watched the older , bigger boys , like Jack . She would look at Jack , with that hidden something in her eyes , and Jack would see the Woman and become breathless and a little sick . School began in August , the hottest part of the year , and for the first few days Miss Langford was very lenient with the children , letting them play a lot and the new ones sort of get acquainted with one another . The first two or three days they went home early . All , that is , except Jack . He hung around the schoolhouse , watching through a window from outside while Miss Langford straightened desks and put the room in order . Once ( this was on the third day of school ) she kneeled down to pick up some books where they'd dropped on the floor and Jack looked up her dress -- at the bare expanse of incredibly white leg . He thought for a moment his heart had stopped beating . About that time Miss Langford straightened up and looked out the window directly at him , he thought , although probably she didn't even see him . He jumped back , ducked and ran , crouching , down the hill away from the school . He didn't look back and he ran until he was out of sight of the schoolhouse and out of breath ; ; then he slowed to a walk . The vision became even stronger now . `` I'll get her yet '' , he muttered to himself . `` I've got to get her '' . That night he dreamed a dream violent with passion , in which he and the Woman , now the teacher , did everything except engage in the act ( and this probably only because he had never engaged in the act in reality ) , and when he awoke the next morning his heart was afire . He ate litle that morning , and his mother became concerned , inasmuch as he usually ate heartily . `` What's the matter , honey '' ? ? She said , with the solicitude of a middle-aged woman for her only child . `` Aren't you hungry '' ? ? `` No , I'm not hungry '' , he said , pushing back the bacon and eggs . Outside it was already hot at 7:30 A.M. , and it was getting hot in the kitchen . He felt a little sick at his stomach . `` Are you sick '' ? ? `` No '' , he said . `` I'll be all right . I guess it's this hot weather '' . `` Don't you play hard today then . And if you get sick , ask the teacher to let you come home early . Daddy left the car for me , and I'm going to town this afternoon '' . `` OK. , I won't play hard '' , he promised . Just then Charles Lever yelled , `` Hey , Jack '' , from the quarry road which ran behind the Carter house , and Jack grabbed the lunch from the table and darted out the kitchen door , yelling `` Good-bye , Mom '' over his shoulder . `` Whaddya say , boy '' ? ? Charles said , grinning , showing his huge yellow teeth . Charles , also fifteen , was tall and skinny , scraggly , with straight black hair like an Indian's and sharp brown eyes . He considered himself handsome and seemed to think all the girls were after him . `` You know what I done last night '' ? ? Charles said as they picked their way over the rocky road which led up the hill away from the Dixie Highway , through a corn field and a patch of woods to the school . Jack knew of course that the tale to be unfolded would involve a girl and probably be dirty , because girls were Charles' only apparent interest . But Jack always derived vicarious sensual thrills from Charles' revelations ( even when he suspected his friend of exaggeration or invention ) , so he usually invited them , as he did now . `` No . What '' ? ? `` I got Margaret Rider in one of them old box cars down there by the quarry '' . A nude imaginary picture of Miss Langford flashed across Jack's mind . His heart beat faster . `` Hell you say '' ? ? He said , lapsing into the profanity he often used when away from his parents and especially when he was with Charles . `` How'd you do it '' ? ? `` Hell , I jist got on top of -- '' `` No , I mean how'd you get her to do it '' ? ? `` Hell , I jist ask her '' . `` Jist like that '' ? ? `` Hell , yes . She's been hangin' around me a lot here lately , and I figgered I might as well's try it . Besides I heard her old uncle that stays there has been doin' it '' . `` I never heard that '' . `` It's all over Branchville . If you'd get out of your back yard once in a while you might even get her your ownself '' . `` I might try it one of these days '' , Jack said wonderingly , thinking of Miss Langford . When they reached the school , a gang of boys and girls were already there playing `` crack the whip '' in front of the schoolhouse . Miss Langford , in a fresh white dress and low-heeled white sandals , without socks , was out there with them , trying to get them inside . `` Time for books '' , she yelled , jingling a little five-and-dime store bell in her right hand . `` Let's go inside '' . `` Oh , come on Miss Langford , play with us just onct '' , one of the little girls begged , smiling wistfully . `` No , not now '' , said the teacher . `` Maybe at dinner time . Come inside now '' . The children grudgingly stopped playing then and straggled into the schoolhouse . Jack watched Miss Langford all morning . He could think of nothing else save his mental image of her nude figure and what Charles had said that morning about Margaret Rider . Occasionally he would look across the aisle at Margaret , fourteen and demure in a fresh green organdy dress , sitting in the sixth-grade row , and he could hardly believe she would do what Charles had said she did . At noontime , remembering what the teacher had said about maybe playing with the kids , Jack stayed close to the schoolhouse while all the other big boys , except Charles , went off out the road to play ball . `` Why ain't you playin' ball '' ? ? He asked Charles suspiciously as they sat in the well-house shade , watching the girls congregate in front of the schoolhouse . `` Miss Langford , come out and play with us like you promised '' , several of the little girls called . `` I'd druther stay here and watch the girls '' , Charles grinned . `` Maybe some of 'em will fall down and we'll see up their dress '' . `` Maybe '' , Jack said idly , watching for Miss Langford . Presently she came out of the schoolhouse . When she appeared , two or three of the little girls jumped up and down , yelling , `` Goody , goody '' . `` Let's play with 'em '' , Jack said , rising from where he sat on the ground and dusting off his overall pants . `` O.K. '' Charles rose also , and the two of them moved over to join the girls . They played crack the whip a few minutes without mishap . Then when Miss Langford was on the end of the line of girls , Jack , in the middle of the line , gave an extra hard pull and the young teacher sprawled backwards , sitting down hard , her dress flying over her head . While she was struggling to get her skirt down and get on her feet again , Jack ran over , offered her his hand and said , `` Gosh , I'm sorry , Miss Langford . I didn't mean to pull so hard '' . `` That's all right '' , she said , tossing her head back to get the hair out of her eyes . `` It was my fault '' . With one hand she held her skirt down while she took Jack's extended hand with the other . When her hand touched his , fire went through Jack and he felt weak , but he managed somehow to get her on her feet . He thought she gave him that look with the hidden something in it as he let her hand go . `` Thank you '' , she said , dusting herself off . `` Will you play with us again , Miss Langford '' ? ? One of the little girls said . `` No more today . Maybe some other day '' . `` Oh , shucks '' , the girl said . `` I don't believe I'll play any more neither '' . `` Me neither '' , others said , and soon the game broke up , the children going off in pairs , in larger groups and alone . Jack walked off alone out the road in the searing midday sun , past Robert Allen's three-room , tarpapered house , toward the field where the other boys were playing ball , thinking of what he would do in order to make Miss Langford have him stay in after school -- because this was the day he had decided when he thought he saw the look in her eyes . When he came back to the schoolhouse , his mind was made up . He simply would not work his arithmetic problems when the teacher held his class . That should do it , he thought , because Miss Langford had said she was going to be strict about school work . He had considered throwing erasers or flipping paperwads at someone or pulling the hair of the girl sitting in front of him , but he couldn't take a chance on either of these possibilities : the teacher probably would make him stand face-to-wall in a corner instead of stay in after school . The only drawback now to the plan he'd decided on was that someone else might fail to do his work , too , and the teacher would have that person stay late along with Jack . `` But I've got to take a chance on it '' , he told himself desperately . To his surprise his plan worked perfectly . `` All right , if you can't do your arithmetic during school hours you can do it after school is out '' , Miss Langford said firmly , not smiling . `` You will stay here thirty minutes after the others go home this afternoon and work your problems '' . And so when the others stampeded out that afternoon Jack remained docilely in his seat near a window , looking out in what he hoped was a pitiable manner , while the other kids laughed and yelled in at him and made faces as they dispersed , going home . He scarcely saw them . His heart was pounding like a mighty dynamo and he was trying to think , his mind seeming to scream at him like a hurt or frightened child , `` How will I do it ? ? On the fringe of the amused throng of white onlookers stood a young woman of remarkable beauty and poise . She munched little ginger cakes called mulatto's belly and kept her green , somewhat hypnotic eyes fixed on a light-colored male who was prancing wildly with a 5-foot king snake wrapped around his bronze neck . The youth with the snake had a natural pride and joy of life which appealed to the woman . Lithe and muscular , he had well-molded features , and his light color told of the European ancestors who had been intimate with the slave women of his family . The haughty white girl turned to a distinguished , hawk-faced man standing at her side and murmured : `` Look at your watch , Col. Garvier . It is almost time for and calinda to begin '' . Col. Henri Garvier was one of New Orleans' most important and enlightened slave owners . He chuckled and gave the signal for the dance to start . The slaves ran gaily to the center of Congo Square and gathered around a sweaty youth they called Johnny No-Name . Johnny vigorously pounded two bleached steer bones against the gourd which served as his drum . He showed his gleaming tusks of teeth and bellowed incoherently , his brass earrings jangling discordantly as he shook and trembled in ecstasy . The drummer flogged the gourd with frantic intensity as the dancers began the calinda , a sensual gyration which had long been a favorite of voodoo practitioners and their disciples in the Louisiana slave compounds . The dance was of Haitian origin . The white girl with the penetrating green eyes sipped the lemonade handed to her by a handsome man of about 30 , who had coppery skin and beetling eyebrows . He was possessive in his manner and , though a slave , obviously was educated after a fashion and imitated the manners of his owners . He proudly wore the blue livery of her house , for the girl was Madame Delphine Lalaurie , wife of the prominent surgeon , Dr. Louis Lalaurie , who bore one of the South's oldest and most cherished names . Delphine was a pace-setter in high society . She was a top horsewoman and one of the city's most gracious hostesses . Although New Orleans was not to learn of it for a spell , she also was a sadist , a nymphomaniac and unobtrusively mad -- the perpetrator of some of the worst crimes against humanity ever committed on American soil . Madame Lalaurie gestured with her riding crop toward the 20-year-old youth who was stomping and writhing with the king snake still draped over his bare shoulders . The slender , handsome fellow was called Dandy Brandon by the other slaves . He was gifted with animal magnetism and a potent allure for women of any race . But Dandy had had little experience with girls on his master's plantation in Bayou St. John . Shy , actually , he avoided feminine overtures and seemed truly ignorant of the girls' desires when they sought to make liaisons with him in the open fields , in carriages and in boathouses . This young slave was therefore quite unprepared when Delphine Lalaurie signaled that she wanted him to draw near . The woman eyed the youth with the avidity a coin collector might display toward a rare doubloon which is not yet in his collection . `` What is your name , boy ? ? Come a bit closer . I won't bite , you know '' . He gaped at Madame Lalaurie and sniffed the Paris perfume which emanated from her . Then he smiled shyly . `` My name is Dandy Brandon , missy . I belong to Master Alexander Prieur '' . She said with intense feeling : `` Come near , let me feel your arms . You look quite strong and healthy to me , Dandy '' . Mrs. Lalaurie impatiently propelled the slave toward her waiting carriage . Lifting her skirts , she climbed in , never relinquishing her grip on his arm . The woman seemed utterly unafraid of the snake which coiled on the floor in a torpor . Once inside the luxuriosly-upholstered landau , she drew the curtains and proceeded to give the startled youth the kind of physical examination usually reserved for army inductees . Satisfied at last , and after a few amorous gambits on her part which convinced Delphine that Dandy was capable of learning new arts , she opened the window and called to her liveried driver . This was the big man with the proprietory air and the beetling , shaggy eyebrows . `` Aristide ! ! I want you to find Monsieur Prieur at once and give him this money for the boy's purchase . There's $600 in gold in this chamois sack . If the old fool argues about the price , tell him I shall order my husband not to treat him as a patient any longer . Prieur has gout and depends on Louis' pills and bleedings . Besides , he owns 300 slaves . One less shouldn't matter to him '' . Aristide Devol , the sardonic manservant who had been brought in chains years before from his native Sierra Leone , smiled thinly and touched his well-brushed beaver hat . His bold eyes raked the woman , and a perceptive spectator might sense that there was more to their relationship than that of slave to owner . `` Another youth , Madame '' ? ? The coachman said softly . `` This one is a tender chicken , oui ? ? Such delicate beauty , such fine flesh . It will rip and shred easily for Madame '' . `` Be quiet , Devol ! ! You are forgetting your place '' . The tall coachman walked off briskly in search of Alexander Prieur . Delphine Lalaurie took the reins in her gloved hands and drove Dandy Brandon -- cowering in the back seat of the carriage -- to her mansion at 677 Perdido Street . Dr. Louis Lalaurie stood on the veranda at the head of the driveway and watched his carriage as it approached the pillared mansion . Dandy , curiosity overcoming his apprehensions , peered out at the doctor from the window of the vehicle . He saw a pint-sized man with a graying spade beard and an unusually large head . Dr. Lalaurie wore a maroon smoking jacket , and his myopic eyes were blurry and glistened behind thick octagonal lenses . He was about 50 years old . `` Another young man , my dear ? ? Really , you are most indiscreet to drive him here yourself '' , he said , frowning with displeasure . Delphine presented her cheek for a kiss , and the physician pecked it like a timid rooster . `` Dandy is to be our house guest , Louis . I want the room in the attic prepared for him He is a most unusual lad , quite precocious in many ways . He deserves a better life than just rotting away on the Prieur plantation '' . `` Quite so , my dear . His room will be ready shortly '' . The physician led the horses to the stable after a cursory glance at the cringing slave . Had Dandy been older or wiser , instinct might have warned him that he would be well advised to flee from the Lalauries' tender care if he valued his life . But he liked the smell of Delphine's perfume . Besides , her endearments and caresses in the carriage had been new and stirring experiences to the simple youth . Also , he was weary of plantation drudgery and monotony . So Dandy Brandon trustingly entered the house with Delphine Lalaurie and trudged up the rear steps to the attic room which was to be his new home . Airless and dingy though it was , the attic represented luxury to a slave who had led a wretched life with six brothers and sisters and assorted relatives in a shanty at Bayou St. John . He bounced exuberantly on the sagging bed and was even more delighted when Madame Lalaurie -- after closing the door -- showed the slave that the bed was designed for something other than slumber . It was just as well that the ignorant Dandy enjoyed himself to the hilt that first evening , for the room was to become his prison cell . When he finally left the sinister mansion on Perdido Street , he was carried out in a coroner's basket . Just six weeks after Dandy Brandon's arrival at the mansion , the little surgeon and his svelte young wife gave their annual open house and ball , to which only New Orleans' oldest and wealthiest families were invited . A stringed orchestra played softly behind the potted palms , and Delphine circulated graciously among her guests , chatting airily of the forthcoming races , the latest fashions from Paris , and Louisiana politics . Suddenly there was a commotion upstairs , a despairing boyish shriek , and the strains of the waltz faltered and died as the musicians and guests gaped at an apparition descending the marble staircase . It was Dandy Brandon , clad only in a bloody loincloth , emaciated and quaking as if the devil were breathing hard on him . The lad's once superb body was a mass of scars and welts . His pinched face showed the ravages of malnutrition . Feebly he pointed an accusing finger at Madame Lalaurie and shouted : `` Evil woman ! ! You did this you like to hurt to beat people I want to go home '' . These were the last words he ever uttered . Convulsively , he spat up some blood and collapsed into the arms of Senator Gaston Berche , crimsoning the frilly shirt and waistcoat the politician wore . Dr. Louis Lalaurie examined the inert form of the slave on the parquet dance floor and pronounced him dead . The ball broke up in confusion . Guests stared with horror at Madame Lalaurie and made speedy departures . Delphine stood like stone , her eyes alive with hate as she looked down at the sheeted corpse . But at the coroner's inquest Delphine told a forthright story . `` I saw the boy Dandy at the Congo Square festivities and felt sorry for him . It was our hope to educate him and to give him his freedom when the right time came , for he was a bright and friendly youth who seemed worthy of our interest . After I paid Monsieur Prieur for Dandy , I brought him home , but he was ill at ease and ran away the same night . How he returned in such a ghastly condition , or why , I cannot say . Dr. Lalaurie and I didn't even know he was in the house until the night of our ball when he came down the stairs '' . She daubed at her swimming eyes with a lacy handkerchief and said with obvious emotion : `` That poor boy ! ! He must have fallen in with evil companions , for he was a simple youth and quite trusting and inexperienced . Ruffians must have robbed and beaten him before bringing him back to our house to die . Such a pitiful end '' ! ! Though the slave's dying words about the woman troubled the coroner's panel , Dandy's accusation was adjudged an aberration by the jury and disregarded . The Lalauries were at the top rung of the social ladder , and even a jury didn't feel privileged to doubt the veracity of so illustrious a lady . Moreover , runaway slaves frequently got into serious trouble in New Orleans' dives . So the verdict was `` death at the hands of a person or persons unknown '' , and the elite of the city , accepting Delphine's testimony , welcomed her and the doctor back into the fold . Once again life went its serene way -- soirees , fox hunts , balls and dinners . The excitement over Brandon's bizarre death abated and Madame Lalaurie's stock soared when she resumed her self-imposed chores of visiting the poor and bringing cakes and comfort to destitute patients in the county hospital . Then , on July 2 , there occurred another incident which set tongues to wagging at a furious clip . Mrs. Victor Dominique , socially prominent and a neighbor of the Lalauries , chanced to glance out of her parlor window at dusk one evening and beheld an amazing sight . The manservant Devol and his mistress , Delphine Lalaurie , were pursuing a young girl -- an octoroon of cameo-like beauty -- across the front lawn of the Lalaurie mansion . The girl was not more than 16 . She was nude to the waist and her tumbled abundance of black hair did not conceal the knife slashes on her back . The bleeding girl was tiring fast ; ; the coachman and Delphine were gaining on her as she raced down Perdido Street . The fugitive cried out in an oddly sibilant voice : `` Help me , somebody ! ! They have pulled out all my teeth and now she will carve out my tongue with her hacksaw ! ! `` Bastards '' , he would say , `` all I did was put a beat to that Vivaldi stuff , and the first chair clobbered me '' ! ! Since then , and since the pure grain had gotten him divorced from every decent -- and even indecent -- group from Greenwich Village to the Embarcadero , he had become a sucker-rolling freight-jumper . `` There ain't nothin' faster , or lonelier , or more direct than a cannonball freight when you wanna go someplace '' , Feathertop would say . `` The accommodations may not be the poshest , but man ! ! There ain't nobody askin' for your ticket stub , neither '' . He had been conning the freights for a long , long time now . Ever since the hooch , and the trouble with the Quartet , and Midge and the child . Ever since all that . It had been a very long time that had no form and no end . He was -- as he told himself in the vernacular of a trade no longer his own -- riding the dark train out . Out and out and never to return again . Till one day the last freight had been jumped , the last pint had been killed , the last beat had been rapped . That was the day it ended . The freight car was cold , early in the morning . He was pressed far back into the corner of the car on his hay sacks , the rattling and tinning of the wheels on the rails almost covering the sound of his ocarina . He held his elbows away from his body , and the little sweet potato trilled neatly and sweetly as he tickled its tune-belly . The train slowed at a road crossing , and the big door slid open ; ; at first gratingly , caught by grains of corn -- then with a clash into its slot . The boy lifted the girl by the waist and set her on the lip of the floor . She pulled her legs up under her , to rise , her full peasant skirt drawing up her thighs , and Feathertop's music pfffted away . `` Now that is a very nice , a very nice '' , he murmured to himself , back in his corner . A little thing , but the right twist for the action that counted . Hot , that was the word , hot ! ! Hair like a morning-frightened sparrow's wings , with the sun shining down over them . A poet , yet ! ! His thoughts for the swanlike neck , the full , high breasts , the slim waist , and the long legs were less than poetic , however . Zingggg-O ! ! Then the boy straight-armed himself up , twisting at the last moment so he landed sitting . He was less to see , but Feathertop took him in , too , just to keep the records straight . Curly hair , high cheekbones , wide gnomelike mouth , a pair of drummer's blocky hands , and a body that said well , maybe I can wrestle you for ten minutes -- but then I'm finished . `` We made it , Cappy '' , the chick said . `` Yeah , seems so , don't it '' , the boy laughed , hugging her close . `` Ah-ah '' ! ! Feathertop interrupted , standing up , brushing the pig offal from his dirty pants . `` None of that . We run a respectable house here '' . They whirled and saw him , standing there dim in the slatted light from the boarded freight wall . He was big , and filthy , and his toes stuck out of the flapping tops of his shoes . He held the black plastic kazoo lightly . `` Come sit '' , said Feathertop , motioning them toward him . `` That crap is softer over here '' . The girl smiled , and started forward . The boy yanked her back hard , tugging her off her feet , and gathered her into the crook of his arm . `` Now stay with me , Kitty '' , he snapped irritably . `` I vowed to take care of you -- and that's what I'm gonna do . We don't know this guy '' . `` Oooo , square bit '' , Feathertop screwed his face up . This guy was strictly from Outsville . But nowhere ! ! `` What is with this vow jazz '' ? ? Feathertop inquired , lounging against the freight's vibrating wall . `` We -- we eloped '' , Cappy said . His head came up and he said it defiantly . `` Well , congratulations '' . Feathertop made an elaborate motion with his hand . These two were going to be easy pickins . They couldn't have much dough , but then none of the freight-bums Feathertop rolled had much . And besides , the chick had a little something the others didn't have . That was gonna be fun collecting ! ! But not just yet . Feathertop was a connoisseur . He liked to savor his meat before he tasted it . `` Come sit '' , he repeated , motioning to the piled hay bags , over the pig leavings . `` I'm just a poor ex-jazz man , name of -- uh -- Boyd Smith '' . He grinned at them wolfishly . `` That ain't your name , Mister '' , the boy accused . `` And you know -- you're right '' ! ! Feathertop aimed a finger at him . `` Oh , come on , Cappy '' , the girl chided . `` He's okay . He's a nice guy '' . She started to move toward the hay bags , dragging the reluctant Cappy behind her . Feathertop watched the smooth scissoring of her slim , trim legs as she walked to the bags , and tucked them beneath her , smoothing the skirt out in a wide circle . He cleared his throat ; ; it had been a long , hot while since he'd seen anything as nice as this within grabbin' distance . He had it all doped , of course . Slug the kid , grab his dough -- at least enough to get to Philadelphia -- and then have a rockin' ball with the doll . Hmm -- diddle ! ! `` Where'd you come from , Mr. -- uh -- Mr. Smith '' ? ? Kitty inquired politely . `` Where from '' ? ? He mused . `` Out . I been riding train for a ways now '' . They lapsed into silence , and the freight wallowed up a hill , scooted down the other side , shaking and clanking to itself . After a while , Kitty murmured something to Cappy , and he held her close , answering , `` We'll just have to wait till we pull into Philly , honey '' . `` What's the matter , she wanna go the bathroom '' ? ? Ernie found it immensely funny . The boy scowled at him , and the girl looked shocked . `` No ! ! Certainly not , I mean , no that isn't what I said '' ! ! She snapped at him . `` I only said I was hungry . We haven't had anything to eat all day '' . Joviality suffused Feathertop Ernie Cargill's voice as he reached behind him , pulling out a battered carpet bag , with leather handles . `` Whyn't ya say so , fellow travelers ! ! Why , we got dinner right here . C'mon , buddy , help me set up the kitchen and we'll have food in a minute or two '' . Cappy looked wary , but he moved off the floorboards and followed the dirty ex-musician to the center of the refuse-littered boxcar . Ernie crouched and opened the carpet bag . He took out a small packet filled with bits of charcoal , a deep pot of thin metal , some sheets of newspaper , a book of matches and a wrinkled and many-times folded piece of tin foil with holes in it . He put the charcoal in the pot , lit the paper with the matches , and carefully stretched the tin foil across the top of the pot . `` A charcoal pit , man '' , he said , indicating the slightly-smoking makeshift brazier . `` Fan it '' , he told Cappy , handing him a sheet of newspaper . `` Yeah , but what're we gonna eat ? ? Charcoal '' ? ? `` Fella '' , Ernie waggled a dirty finger at the younger man , `` you try my ever-lovin' patience '' . He reached once more into the carpet bag and brought up a package of wieners . `` Hot dogs , man . Not the greatest , but they stick to your belly insides '' . He ripped down the cellophane carefully , and laid three dogs on the tin foil . Almost immediately they began to sizzle . He looked up and grinned . `` A Kroger's self-serve '' , he explained . `` I self-served '' . When they had licked the last of the wieners' taste from their fingers , they settled back , and Cappy offered Ernie a cigarette . Nice kid , Ernie thought , too bad . `` How come you're riding the rods , kids like you '' ? ? Ernie asked . Cappy looked down at his wide hands , and did not reply . But surprisingly , Kitty's face came up and she said , `` My father . He didn't want us to get married . So we ran away '' . `` Why didn't he want you to get hitched '' ? ? This time even she did not answer . She looked down at her hands , too . After a few seconds , she said , `` Dad didn't like Cappy . It was my fault '' . Cappy's head came around sharply . `` Your fault , hell ! ! It was all my fault . If I'd been careful it never woulda '' -- he stopped abruptly . Ernie's eyebrows went up . `` What's the matter '' ? ? The girl still did not raise her eyes , but she added simply , `` I'm pregnant '' . Cappy raged at himself . `` Oh he was stupid , her old man ! ! You never heard nothin' like it : Kitty's gonna go have an abortion , and Kitty's gonna go away to a convent , and Kitty's this and Kitty's that like he was nuts or somethin' , y'know '' ? ? Ernie nodded . This was a slightly different matter . He remembered Midge , and the child . But that had been a time before all this , a time he didn't think about . A time before the white lightning and the bumming had turned him inside out . But these kids weren't like him . Oh crap ! ! He thought , Pull out of it , old son . These are just another couple of characters to roll . What they got , you get . Now forget all this other . `` Wanna drink '' ? ? Ernie offered , taking the pint of sweet lucy from his jacket pocket . `` Yeah . Now that you offer '' . The answer came from the open door of the boxcar . From the man who had leaped in from the high bank outside , as the train had slowed on the grade . Ernie stared at the man . He was big . Real big , with shoulders out to here , and hair all over him like a grizzly . Road gang , Ernie thought . `` You gonna give me a drink , fella '' ? ? The big man asked again , taking a step into the boxcar . Ernie hesitated a moment . This character could break him in half . `` Sure '' , he said , and lifted the pint to his own lips . He guzzled down three-quarters of the strong home-blend and proffered the remainder . The man stalked toward them , his big boots heavy on the wooden flooring . He took the bottle with undue belligerence , and making sucking noises with his thick lips , drained it completely . He threw his head back , closed his eyes , and belched ferociously . He belched again , and opening his eyes , threw the bottle out the open door . `` Well , now '' , he said , and reached into his pocket . `` I didn't know I was gonna have company in this car '' . `` We're going to Philadelphia '' , Kitty said , pulling her skirt down around her legs all the more . `` No , I don't think so '' , said the big man , and it was the final clincher for Ernie . He had suspected this guy was trouble , and now he was sure of it . `` Maybe you and me will , girlie , but these two ain't goin' nowhere '' . He advanced on them , and abruptly there was a shocked electricity in the car . Ernie was screaming inside himself : No , damn you , you ain't gonna take my meal ticket away from me ! ! The newcomer stalked toward them , and Kitty shied back , her hand to her mouth . Her scream split up the silence of the car , accompanied by the rattling of the freight , and then Cappy came off the floor , his legs driving him hard . The kid hit the bigger man with an audible thwump ! ! And carried him backward in a footballer's tackle . They went down in a heap and for a long minute there was nothing to see but flailing arms and legs . The kid showed for an instant , and his arm was cocked back . The fist went down into the pile of flesh , and Ernie heard the bigger man's deeper voice go , `` Aaawww '' ! ! Then they were tumbling again , and the big man reached into the same pocket he had gone for earlier , and came up with a vicious switchblade . He held the knife aloft an instant -- an instant enough to press the stud . The blade came out with a snick ! ! He fisted the knife overhand , and drew back to plunge it into the kid's throat . Kitty screamed insanely and her face was white . She grabbed at Feathertop's sleeve and shrieked , `` Help him ! ! Help him ! ! Do something '' ! ! They neither liked nor disliked the Old Man . To them he could have been the broken bell in the church tower which rang before and after Mass , and at noon , and at six each evening -- its tone , repetitive , monotonous , never breaking the boredom of the streets . The Old Man was unimportant . Yet if he were not there , they would have missed him , as they would have missed the sounds of bees buzzing against the screen door in early June ; ; or the smell of thick tomato paste -- the ripe smell that was both sweet and sour -- rising up from aluminum trays wrapped in fly-dotted cheesecloth . Or the surging whirling sounds of bats at night , when their black bodies dived into the blackness above and below the amber street lights . Or the bay of female dogs in heat . They never called him by name , although he had one . Filippo Rossi , that's what he was called in the old country ; ; but here he was just Signore or the Old Man . But this was not unusual , because youth in these quarters was always pushed at a distance from its elders . Youth obeyed when commanded . It went to church on Sunday and one Saturday a month went to confession . But youth asked nothing of its parents -- not a touch of the hand or a kiss given in passing . The only thing unusual about the Old Man had long since happened . But the past was dead here as the present was dead . Once the Old Man had had a wife . And once she , too , ignored him . With a tiny fur-piece wrapped around her shoulders , she wiggled her satin-covered buttocks down the street before him and didn't stop . In one hand she clutched a hundred dollar bill and in the other a straw suitcase . The way she strutted down the street , the Old Man would have been blind not to have noticed both . Without looking at him , without looking at anything except Drexel Street directly in front of her , she climbed up into one of those orange streetcars , rode away in it , and never came back . `` But she shouldn't have come here in the first place '' , the women had said . `` No , no . Not that one . She thought she was bigger than we are because she came from Torino '' . `` Eh , Torino ! ! She gave herself fancy airs ! ! Just because she had a part on the stage in the old country , she thought she could carry her head higher than ours '' . They had slapped their thighs . `` It's not for making pretty speeches about Dante those actresses get paid so good '' . `` Henh '' ! ! Calloused fingers , caressed only by the smoothness of polished rosaries , had swayed excitedly beneath puckered chins where tiny black hairs sprouted , never to be tweezed away . Mauve-colored mouths that had never known anything sweeter than the taste of new wine and the passion of man's tongue had not smiled , but had condemned again and again . `` Puttana '' ! ! But if the Old Man even thought about his wife now , nobody cared a fig . It was enough for people to know that at one time he had looked down the street at the fleshy suppleness of a woman he had consumed -- watching her become thinner and thinner in the distance , as thin as the seams on her stockings , and still thinner . His voice had not commanded her to stop . It had not questioned why . The women said they had seen him wave an exhausted farewell ; ; but he might have been shooing away the fleas that hopped from his yellow dog onto him . ( He was never without that dog . ) And his eyes -- those miniature sundials of variegated yellow -- had not altered their expression or direction . The Old Man's very soul could have left him and flown down that street , but he wouldn't have had anyone know it . Perhaps he had known then where that hundred dollar bill had come from and where it was taking his wife . But when he called for his withered , wrinkled sister Rose to care for him and the children , had he guessed that all he would remember of his woman was the memory of her climbing into that streetcar ? ? There seemed to be a contemptuous purpose in the way he sat there with his eyes glued to Drexel Street and his back in opposition to the church behind him . For all he saw or cared to see , this could have been a town in Italy , not the outskirts of Philadelphia . It could have been Bari or Chieti for the way it smelled . What did it matter to him that the park at the foot of Ash Road stretched beneath elevated trains that roared from the stucco station into the city's center at half-hour intervals ? ? Or that the tiny creek spun its silent course toward the Schuylkill ? ? This place was hatred to him , just as hatred was his only companion in his aloneness . To him they were one and the same . Sameness for the Old Man was framed in by a wall of ginkgo trees which divided these quarters from the city . Sameness lined the streets with two-story houses the color of ash . It slashed the sloping manure-scented lawns with concrete steps which climbed upward to white wooden porches . It swayed with the wicker swings and screeched with the rusted hinges of screen doors . Even the stable-garage , which housed nothing now but the scent of rot , had a lawn before it . And the coffee shop on Drexel Street , where the men spent their evenings and Sundays playing cards , had a rose hedge beneath its window . The hedge reeked of coffee dregs thrown against it . Only one house on the street had no lawn before it . It squatted low and square upon the sidewalk with a heavy iron grating supporting a glass facade . That was Bartoli's shop . Above it , from a second-story showroom , wooden angels surveyed the neighborhood . Did the Old Man remember them there ? ? Yet everywhere else sameness was stucco and wood in square blocks -- like fortresses perched against the slant of the hill , rising with the hill to the top where the church was and beyond that to the cemetery . Only paved alleyways tunneled through the walls of those fortresses into the mysterious core of intimacy behind the houses where backyards owned no fences , where one man's property blended with the next to form courtyards in which no one knew privacy . Love and hatred and fear were one here , shaded only by fig trees and grape vines . And the forked tongue of gossip licked its sinister way from back porch to back porch . The Old Man silently fed upon these streets . They kept him alive , waiting . Waiting for what and for whom , only he could tell and would not . It was as though he had made a pact with the devil himself , but it was not yet time to pay the price . He was holding out for something . He was determined to hold out . The Old Man's son threw himself down , belly first , upon a concrete step , taking in the coolness of it , and dreaming of the day he would be rich . At fifteen he didn't care that he had no mother , that he couldn't remember her face or her touch ; ; neither did he care that Aunt Rose provided for him . He was named Pompeii as a tribute to his heritage , and he couldn't have cared less about that either . To him life was a restless boredom that began with the rising sun and ended only with sleep . When he would be a man , he would be a rich man . He would not be like the `` rich Americans '' who lived in white-columned houses on the other side of the park . He would not ride the eight-thirty local to the city each morning . He would not carry a brief case . Nor would he work at all . He would square his shoulders and carry a cane before each step . He would sit inside the coffee shop and pound a gloved fist upon the table and a girl would hear him and come running , bowing with her running , calling out in her bowing , `` At your service '' . He would order her to bring coffee , and would take from his vest pocket a thin black pipe which he would stuff -- he would not remove his gloves -- and light and smoke . He could do that when he would be a man . `` Hey , Laura '' ! ! He called to his sister on the porch above the steps . She was only ten months older than he . `` Laura , what would you say if I smoked a pipe '' ? ? Laura did not answer him . She leaned unconcerned against the broken porch fence , brushing and drying her wet , gilded hair in the sun . One lithe leg straddled the railing and swung loosely before the creaking , torn pales . Her tanned foot , whose arch swept high and white , pointed artfully toward tapering toes -- toes like fingers , whose tips glowed white . All the while she sat there , her sinewy arms swirled before her chest . Her face showed no sign of having heard Pompeii . It was a face that had lost its childlike softness and was beginning to fold within its fragile features a harshness that belied the lyric lines of its contours . The eyes , blue and always somewhat downcast , possessed a sullen quality . Even though the boy could not see them , he knew they were clouded by distance . He was never sure they fully took him in . Pompeii called again , `` Laura '' ! ! But the only answer that reached him was the screeching of the porch rail from her leg moving against it . `` She's in a mood '' , he thought `` There's not a month she doesn't get herself in a mood '' . Well , what did that matter when the sun was shining and there were dreams to dream about ? ? And as for his pipe , if he wanted to smoke one , nobody would stop him . Not even Laura . Suddenly he was interrupted in his daydreaming by a warm wetness lapping against his chin , and his eyes opened wide and long at the sight of a goat's claret tongue , feasting against the salt taste of him . Above the tongue , an aged yellow eye , sallow and time-cast , encrusted within a sphere of marbleized pink skin , stared unfalteringly at him . `` Christ sake , goat , git '' ! ! But the goat would not . `` You're boiling milk , ain't you '' ? ? Soothing it with his hand , knowing the whiskered jowls and the swollen smoothness of teats that wrinkled expectantly to his touch . Pompeii rolled over . His head undulated gradually , covering space , to come straining beneath the taut belly within the warmth of those teats . With his mouth opened wide , he squirted the warm white milk against the roof of his mouth and his tongue savored the light , earthy taste of it . The boy's fingers and mouth operated with the skilled unity of a bagpipe player , pressing and pulling , delighting in what he did . Above him slid the evasive shadow of a storm cloud . Its form was a heavy figure in a fluttering soutane . But the boy could see only the goat's belly . The Old Man near the corner let the shadow pass over him , sensing something portentous in it . He knew it was there , knew also what it was about , but he wouldn't raise a finger except to smooth his yellow dog's back . There would be time enough , perhaps the Old Man reassured himself , to pay the devil his due . Time enough to give up his soul . In the meantime , six sandals , stained an ocher , the same color as Pompeii's shaved hair , edged up close to him . The clapping they made on the concrete interrupted him in the ecstatic pleasure he knew , so that he quickly released his hold on the goat and pretended to be examining its haunches for ticks . He knew at a glance that the biggest sandals belonged to Niobe , the neatest ones to Concetta , and the laced ones to Romeo , Concetta's idiot brother . Pompeii expected Romeo's small body to sink closer and closer to the ground . He expected Concetta's thin hand to reach down to grasp the boy , and her shrill , impetuous voice to sound against the rotundity of his disfigured flesh that was never sure of hearing anything . People came in and out all evening to see the baby and hold it . The room filled with smoke , and Maggie's head throbbed with excitement and fatigue , but Stuart had such a happy , earnest look of proud possession on his face that Maggie couldn't bear to do anything to quench it . Little Anne rapidly outdistanced her mother in recovery . In two months she became a fat highly social baby , with a fuzz of flaxen hair all over her head . She stopped flying into rages and started digesting her food ; ; she developed a peaches and cream complexion and a sunny disposition , and she asked for nothing more of life than that she be kept dry and comfortable and fed huge amounts of food at stated intervals and be carried to where she could watch activity going on around her . She was so heavy that Maggie's arms shook from lifting her and taking care of her . Maggie couldn't seem to get her strength back or catch up with herself with all she had to do : there was the big basket of clothes to be coaxed through the rackety old washer and lugged out and lugged back ; ; there was the daily round of household chores in which Maggie insisted on participating . Worry had a great deal to do with it ; ; Stuart had been laid off at the produce company and had to go back to sitting in his father's office , taking what salary his father could hand out to him . Mr. Clifton would have preferred death and bankruptcy to having his son stay with his wife's people without contributing to his and his family's upkeep , and besides that there were the things that had to be bought for the baby , milk and orange juice and vitamins and soap , just plain soap . Maggie and Stuart pored over figures every night , trying to find how they could squeeze out a few pennies more . In desperation Maggie consulted Eugenia one afternoon : `` Do you think you could find me something I could do here at home to make some money , so I could still watch the baby and do the rest of the things '' ? ? `` It seems to me you have enough to do as it is '' , Eugenia said . She had been watching Maggie go from the washing machine to the baby to the stove and back again . `` I have plenty of odd moments when I could be doing something '' , Maggie said . `` It would make me feel a lot better , but the Woman's Exchange isn't taking baked goods any more and I can't leave the baby with Grandma because she isn't strong enough and the baby's too young to be put in a nursery '' . `` I should think so '' , Eugenia said . `` For one thing you can stop keeping that child in starched dresses and changed from the skin out nineteen times a day '' . `` She's so beautiful , and I do like to keep her looking nice '' . Maggie said . She picked up the baby and nuzzled her fat warm little neck . `` She'll be just as beautiful in something that doesn't have to be ironed '' , Eugenia said . `` Evadna Mae Evans said she didn't put a thing on her child but a flannel wrapper until it was nine months old '' . `` Evadna Mae Evans got all her baby clothes from Best's Liliputian Bazaar in New York , and I'm sick and tired of hearing about Evadna Mae Evans '' . `` Well now , Maggie , you don't have to snap at me '' , Eugenia said . `` I'm just thinking of a way for you to be sensible '' . `` I'm sorry . I do seem to snap at everybody these days , but I would like to think of a way to make a little extra money '' . `` Well , let's see . Let's make a list of your assets '' . Maggie started laughing , and she laughed so hard she couldn't stop , and she kept on laughing while she lugged the clothes out to the yard to hang them up while the sun was still shining . When she came back Eugenia was sitting at the kitchen table with a pencil and envelope jotting down words and figures . `` I have here that you could run a nursery of your own for working mothers '' , Eugenia said . `` We could put up cribs on the second floor sleeping porch and turn the front bedroom into a playroom where it's nice and sunny , but of course it would entail quite a bit of running up and down stairs and Chris said you were to be careful about that '' . `` What else '' ? ? `` You might set up a dress shop in the living room '' . `` Every woman in the block has tried that '' . `` What about a tea room , then ? ? You could set up tables in the front room and serve salads and your baked beans and brown bread and Grandma could dress like a gypsy and tell fortunes '' . `` It's too elaborate . And Grandma isn't strong enough to take on something like that , and to tell you the truth neither am I '' . Eugenia sighed . She said , `` Well , those are the really interesting things , but if you don't like any of those I can turn over some of my extra typing jobs to you , if you think you can type well enough '' . `` Oh , I'm sure I could do that '' , Maggie said . `` But it really wouldn't be fair , taking your jobs away from you '' . `` Don't worry , I can get plenty more '' , Eugenia said , wondering where in the world she could . Maggie was looking much happier already , clearing a space on the table and chattering about how she could put up a typewriter right there , and be brushing up on her typing so Eugenia wouldn't be ashamed of it . `` And then whenever I have a minute I can be working at it , and keep an eye on the baby and the stove at the same time . And I can go back to my contests and be thinking while I'm doing the washing '' . `` What are you going to do with your feet so you don't waste anything '' ? ? Maggie laughed . She said , `` Oh Eugenia , I wish '' `` What '' ? ? `` I wish I had three wishes '' , Maggie said . `` All of them for you '' . It grew bitterly cold toward the end of November , contributing to the miseries of countless numbers of people . The temperature dropped to twenty below at night and stood at zero during the days . The cold settled like a tangible pall over the Mile High City , locking it in an icy grip that harshened its outlines and altered its physical appearance ; ; it had a look of grim stark realism , resembling other cities whose habitual climate was cold , instead of the sprawling bumptious open-handed greedy Western city basking in eternal sunshine at the foot of mountains stored with endless riches and resources . The jobless huddled in the streets outside of employment offices , outside newspaper buildings , in parks , in relief lines , outside government agencies . There weren't facilities to take care of them ; ; there never had been a need felt for such facilities . That kind of poverty was regarded as the exclusive property of the East , which created depressions with their stock markets and their congested populations and their greedy centralization of industries , protected by discriminatory freight rates . The East was popularly supposed to have got the country into war and into depression , dragging the west along ; ; and now the East was creating government agencies for which the West doubtless would have to pay . The government offices were being opened but they weren't being opened fast enough and meanwhile the cold penetrated everything . Shivering , people talked and argued ; ; all this government spending would have to be paid for somehow , but on the other hand desperate circumstances called for desperate remedies and something had to be done . Something had to be done ; ; it was the theme song of millions of American people , their personal problems no less urgent than those of the government . Something had to be done . The Abernathys said it to each other a dozen times a day . Something had to be done about the furnace , the fuel bills , the washing machine , the doctor and dentist bills , about making money stretch for food , for the mortgage , for taxes , for shoes , for half soles , for overshoes , for clothes , for the new leaks in the roof , for gas and light bills ; ; about keeping warm , about keeping well , about meeting the minor emergencies that came up once , twice , fifty times a day . Just dropping the baby's bottle and breaking it became a catastrophe , and Stuart wore out his shoes so fast that he was termed a major disaster . The Abernathy furnace consumed fuel like a giant ravenous maw that had to be appeased by hurling tons of coal into its evil red depths , and no matter how much coal they put in the house remained cold . Cold came in the innumerable cracks that seemed to have sprung up , under doors , around loosened window frames , from the sleeping porches , the attic , from the widened cracks between shingles on the roof . Presently they had to give up running the furnace at full capacity and depend on the old coal range in the kitchen , which had never been removed when the new gas range was installed , and the fireplaces and an electric heater in Grandma's room . It was so cold and so wretched that a sort of desperate gaiety infected all of them , like people stormbound or shipwrecked or caught in some other freak of circumstance so that time stood still and minor anxieties fell away and the only important thing was to cling together and survive . The pipes burst and they all laughed and stood in ice water to their ankles while they swabbed the bathrooms . They lived mainly in the kitchen ; ; they moved Maggie's bed and the baby's basket there , and the rest of them undressed by the stove and ran groaning and shivering to the upper polar regions and plunged into icy beds . Grandma said it was just like the early mining camp days , and it was the way people ought to live , only she was getting too old to take the pleasure from it that she used to . `` You said a mouthful '' , Eugenia said grimly . Eugenia hated being cold worse than anything , and she was beginning to find the joys of poverty wearing thin . She said to Maggie that it was one thing to meet an emergency and another to wallow in it , and it was beginning to look at if this one was going to last forever . `` Plenty of people are poor all their lives '' . `` Plenty of people haven't our brains and talent '' . `` I know you when you start talking about brains and talent '' , Maggie said . `` You're working up to something , and if you don't watch out you'll ruin your whole life one of these days just to prove that the Abernathy family is superior to everything , even a depression '' . `` The only thing that worries me is how I'm going to prove it '' , Eugenia said . They begged Grandma to let them put a bed in the kitchen for her , but Grandma said she was getting too old to sleep in strange beds and be seen with her teeth out , and that she hoped to die in privacy like a Christian and if the Lord willed it to be of pneumonia than it would have to be that way . She didn't want to be the only one with a stove in her room , especially as her life span was nearly run out anyway , and she insisted that Hope have the heater . Hope wouldn't hear of it , and she took the heater back to Grandma's room , and Grandma took it back to Hope's room , and the two of them dragged it back and forth until Grandma tipped it over and almost set her bedspread on fire . She said that proved she wasn't to be trusted with a fire in her room , and she could be burned to a crisp without anybody knowing it . Eugenia suspected her of deliberately overturning the heater because she was getting tired of dragging it back and forth and still wanted her own way , but Hope said if Grandma wouldn't have the heater nobody would have it , so Grandma had to give in . `` Thrifty of her to use it up . Unusual in a case like this , but '' -- `` You can joke ! ! Didn't you read it ? ? She's married that tenant ! ! '' `` I read it , yes . This ought to simplify Tolley's life '' . Laban had more to say . Tolley had gone to live in California . He'd mentioned it , himself , at church and everybody seemed to have the idea that Tolley had left because Jenny had jilted him for Roy Robards . `` It was plain as the nose on your face that they're laughing about it , Mamma . Zion stayed to get my pin , but it'll be a cold day in June when I go back '' . `` We will both go back , Laban '' ! ! Kizzie turned to go inside . `` Let me stay and take the pictures you wanted , Mamma . The sun's right '' -- `` Pictures '' ? ? She swung around . `` What pictures '' ? ? `` In Brace's room ! ! You told me to bring my camera . I'm not going back '' -- `` Indeed you are ! ! Why should I want pictures of an empty room now ? ? Tolley had no idea of marrying that sneaky little Jenny ! ! This -- trip of his had nothing to do with her consorting with tenants , and I am going to see that everybody at Mt. Pleasant understands that simple fact . Wait for me , Laban , I'll be dressed in half a second '' ! ! Frank followed her into the bedroom , hooked her dress up the back . `` Hurry , Frank ! ! They're not going to laugh at the Fairbrothers and Labans very long ! ! Tolley's going is my fault . I drove him away . You know it and I'll tell everybody exactly how it happened '' . She was so beautiful , so valiant , so pitiable . He kissed her . `` Make your confession to God , Kizzie dear , not to the congregation '' . `` I'll decide that when I get there . I was so cruel to Tolley , so unfair . But I'll be fair now ! ! He is coming back , isn't he , Frank '' ? ? Yes , oh yes . What else was there to say ? ? Returning to the log-house he found some favorite lines from Jonathan Swift on his lips : `` Under the window in stormy weather I marry this man and woman together . Let none but Him who rules the thunder Put this man and woman asunder '' . Absolution for his lie ? ? He questioned God's taking time to telegraph the message , but he felt better about Kizzie , and he took the sealed envelope from its pigeonhole , wondering why he had preserved it . If he died before she did , she would never be unable to resist opening it . In any case he would be thrusting a burden on his remaining sons , making them parties to a deception peculiarly his own . It was simply his necessity to confess which had made him write and keep this thing . `` You've told God , Frank '' , he said . `` Why lacerate the -- congregation '' ? ? Reaching for an old clay pot , relic of pioneer days , he tore the envelope in pieces , dropping them into it , touching the little pyre to flame , watching it curl , the red sealing wax melting and bubbling in the feathery ash . Surely now his beloved son could rest in peace . `` ' And let me go , for the night gathers me , and in the night shall no man gather fruit ' '' . A beautiful and haunting line , a subtle genius , Swinburne , difficult not to envy a gifted man , and perhaps he did . But there were great satisfactions , even for a small man . Beyond his window were the greening trees , new spring , eternal hope , eternal life . There lay Grand Fair's Quinzaine , his own young parents' graves , but new life and promise for his sons , grandsons . He poured his thimble of wine for the toast he'd made so often . `` To absent loved ones '' . But this last time he drank not to Brace but `` To Tolley '' ! ! Mr. Robards -- Jenny was the only person she knew of in the Mt. Pleasant neighborhood who called him that -- was kind but too easygoing . It didn't bother him for everybody from the blacksmith to the preacher to say , `` Howdy , Miss Jenny '' , adding a careless `` Roy '' , but it did her . He could put a stop to it , she told him again and again . Simply call Mr. Whipsnade Oscar , and Dr. Dunne P.GA , and C'un Major Frank . Mr. Robards laughed , said he'd feel a damn fool , plain-out couldn't do that even to please her . `` You could try . And if I ever hear you say ' Mist Laban ' again I'll scream . And don't tell me you didn't at church Sunday . I heard you '' ! ! He really hadn't meant to , he assured her , but it was plain to her that the importance of these small things was lost on Mr. Robards . How strange it was that he could give her this handsome house and carte blanche as to its beautiful furnishings , and fail her in -- spiritual ways . Another weakness -- far more irritating than his manner of speaking , which he made only token effort to change -- was his devotion to that old horse of Tolley's . Her horse , rather . But Mr. Robards' now , oh my yes , indeed , yes ! ! He called her `` the Mare '' much as Mrs. Whipsnade spoke of `` the Queen , God bless her '' . He , with fifteen or twenty horses or mares or geldings or what-nots out there in the barn , was reverent only of `` the Mare '' , `` the Racin' Mare '' , the revolting Gunny . For the first few months of their marriage she had tried to be nice about Gunny , going out with him to watch this pearl without price stamp imperiously around in her stall . And what had happened ? ? Gunny invariably tried to bite her . Nerves , Mr. Robards said , just a nip anyway . `` Stand back , Miss Jen , she's oneasy of your scarf '' . Never , `` Quit that , you sor'l devil '' ! ! Never concern for his wife's nerves , or the danger that the curled lip and big teeth might mark their own dear baby due in January . She musn't annoy Gunny whose foal was due then too ! ! Listening for hours to his laments that the war and `` Mist Fair's '' poverty afterwards had robbed the mare of many a racing triumph , and to his predictions of greatness for the procession of foals to come , Jenny could look forward to years of conflict with an animal who disliked her intensely and showed it . Gunny symbolized so much that was unpleasant -- Tolley , the indifference with which the Fairbrothers and indeed the whole neighborhood now treated her and which she would die rather than acknowledge to her husband , his lack of understanding and sympathy in her present condition , her disgusting swollen stomach . Human birth was no novelty to Mr. Robards . Tillie was a fine midwife and could get here quick , he suggested . Jenny's aversion to having Dr. Dunne , a former admirer , seemed silly to him , but he would humor her , get anybody she wanted , the best never being too good for her . The chances were against his being here to humor her when her time came , she was sure . He would be in the barn , or riding for the veterinarian ! ! Night after night he stayed with Gunny in the dead of winter , rubbing her with quarts of expensive liniment , fussing over her bran mash as the cook did over charlotte russe , tracking manure on the pretty new carpet when he did come to the house . Yet when the dear baby came , he had Tillie over here in a jiffy , and was as attentive and sweet and worried and happy when it was all over as any husband could have been . Jenny wished now that she had had Dr. Dunne , feeling that somehow he wouldn't have allowed the dear baby to turn into triplets . There was something not nice about triplets , though their father seemed pleased , showing no disappointment that they hadn't been the son he wanted , saying , `` You don't see triplets trippin' down the pike ever' day , Miss Jen , hon . Rhyme 'em up cute -- Arcilla , Flotilla '' Edmonia for her mother , she said firmly , Jennifer , for herself , and -- `` Kezziah , for Miss Kizzie '' , he suggested . `` She was mighty good to you past times , an' this'll fetch her '' . Now she must be thinking of a boy-name , something special . Just wait till she saw the Mare's foal . Handsomest colt in all Kentucky . Strong too , up on his legs when he was an hour old . What about Royal Robards ? ? `` Why don't you name him Jesus Christ ! ! '' She burst into tears . Roy was deeply distressed . He'd had no idea how unhappy his sweet peach had been . Of course she wasn't herself right now , but as her strength came back her spirits didn't seem to rise with it . He had a good idea why not . Those elegant `` At Home '' cards she sent out , now she could wear her pretty clothes again , and had the house all trimmed up , hadn't brought many callers in two whole months . Doc Dunne and Miss Sis had come . So had Miss Shawnee Rakestraw , full of criticisms about the changes here , giving thanks that her dear old father had gone to his Heavenly Rest last year , saying how much she enjoyed her boarding house in town in inclement weather , was looking forward to Quinzaine Spa this summer . There was an idea . Miss Kizzie had been right snippy ever since they were married , though you'd have thought a namesake would have brought her round . Oh , she'd come to see them once , left silver teething rings for all of the trips . But when Miss Jen went over right away to return the call , Miss Kiz couldn't have been very cordial , for she'd come back before she hardly had time to get there . More and more , these days , she'd been driving that pretty little mare that looked like her , over to Tillie's and Nick's -- his own old square frame box on posts , chickens and cats and pups under the house , everybody friendly inside , making a to-do over the babies dressed like dollies . Though he was glad she got on well with his young folks , she ought to be welcome at the finest house in the land , too . It made him pretty hot under the collar , after the idea Miss Sis had given him , to be told by Miss Kiz that her holy spa was all reserved for this summer and next , if you please , and that much as she regretted it , they would be unable to entertain Mrs. Robards and the children . She hoped they were well . He didn't tell Miss Jen , but she must have got word from the cook or nurse , who of course knew those Quinzaine nigs , and she really took a fit . If he ever did such a thing again she'd die of shame . `` Have a party an' leave 'em out , hon '' , he suggested . `` A swell party , send an invite to ever'body but them -- those folks you met at the Galt House , the ones I've got to know in this new Jockey Club affair , the whole dang neighborhood . We'll have oystchers -- couple bar'l oystchers'll fetch in a crowd any time . I'll see word gets round '' . `` Don't you dare ! ! '' Miss Jen was funny that way , funny that she didn't seem to take to his ideas and perk up . He was downright worried about her , but there was one more thing he could try . Zion was surprised when Roy's buggy stopped beside her on the pike one early summer day as she was walking home from the country school where she was teaching now that Eph Showers had had a call to preach in some mountain town . Roy smiled -- he did have a nice smile -- took off his hat most politely , told her to hop in , and he'd give her a lift to Quinzaine . Her hesitation was only momentary and she hoped he didn't notice it , as she settled herself , asked quickly how Miss Jenny and the babies were getting on . `` See for yourself , Miss Zion . It won't take a minute '' . He swung in through his own wide gateway . `` Them's the purtiest babes you ever did see , but Miss Jen gets mighty lonesome . She'll relish the sight of a friendly face . Miss Kiz won't care your comin' , will she '' ? ? `` Why of course not '' , Zion said uncomfortably . `` He must have forgiven me '' , Henrietta murmured to the room . The absolution of Doaty's last will and testament was proof enough of that ; ; Doaty would never have left her house to a godless woman . She found herself wishing an old wish , that she had told Doaty she was running away , that she had left something more behind her than the loving , sorry note and her best garnet pin . Perhaps Doaty had guessed already and kept her counsel . Henrietta thought , It's extraordinary how much she always knew about both of us . There had been more to know about Hetty , inevitably , and most of it unfavorable . Adelia was the good one , or , if not always good , less frequently tempted . Their childhood would have been quite circumspect without Hetty's flair for drama , especially through the long summers . In winter , in the city , there had been the Maneret School , which taught excellently with a kind of austere passion for knowledge ; ; there had been lessons in French from a small Polish nobleman with a really profound distaste for his pupils ; ; there had been the dancing class -- Miss Craddock , thin and tireless , with her supervising wand and her everlasting one-two-three , one-two-three . There had been supper parties and teas , fetes and little balls , Mama small and pretty and gay and Papa enormously jocular , enormously possessive , the sun around which the Blackwell planets revolved . Mama had died before the corruption of the family circle , the interruption of Charles . It was safe to assume that Papa , sighing heavily , had said many times to his remaining daughter , `` Thank God your poor mother was spared this '' , and indeed it might be true that it had been easier for Henrietta to leave , with her hand in Charles' hand , just because her `` poor mother '' was gone already and would never know . Mama was vulnerable ; ; one had always felt the need to make a safe world around her . But I would have gone anyway , thought Henrietta . She had always been able to ignore the moral question because there had been no choice . Only at this moment -- perhaps because it was before dawn and she was lying in Doaty's bed -- she found herself examining how others might regard her . Perhaps they would argue that morality consisted just of that ability to see a choice . She turned on her side , finding the idea oppressive . If Adelia had felt about someone as Henrietta felt about Charles , would she have run away with him ? ? Impossible to imagine Adelia feeling so about anyone . No temptation , no sin . No temptation , no virtue ? ? A curious thought to end a curious night . The birds were really awake now in a colloquy of music , and light was beginning to creep across the room , touching sill and door , table and chair and all of Doaty's flowers in their artificial blossom and leaf . Before anything else , she would go to Doaty's grave with flowers from Doaty's forgotten garden . Everything must wait upon this mission , this sentimental duty of a pilgrim whose nature avoided graveyards . She closed her eyes , remembering the small French cemetery , enclosed by stone walls . It had always seemed to rain there , and even the grass was gray . After the sad impatient moment , waiting for comfort which could not come , she slipped out of bed and went to the open window . The garden below was lacy with dew and enchanting in its small wildness . Leaning out , she could see a tangle of rosebush and honeysuckle , one not quite come to bloom , one just beyond it . On a thrusting spray thick with thorns and dewdrops and swelling pink buds , like a summer Valentine , a bird balanced and sang , nondescriptly brown and alive with its own music , a little engine of song . It was so pretty and artless that she felt like a child again and would have enjoyed running out barefoot to play on the wet grass with all the growing things , but Doaty never permitted bare feet and she was decidedly not a child but une femme d'un certain age . Feeling suddenly neat and subdued , she dressed quite soberly and went downstairs . Rosa , unbelievably , was not yet up and about , reassurance that Rosa was human . Feeling protective toward this sleeping being , Henrietta found a yesterday bun and milk in a white jug , a breakfast which was somewhat the equivalent of going barefoot . Outside , the garden , the tame wilderness , yielded a patchwork bouquet of daisies , sweet william , scented stock and lady's bedstraw , which she tied with long grasses and took back to show Rosa , who was now stirring about the kitchen and haranguing Folly . The poodle came gleefully to Henrietta and begged for the flowers , supplicating the air with prayerful forepaws . Henrietta held her bouquet out of reach and said it was for Doaty . `` Rummaging in the dew '' , said Rosa coldly . `` Go change your shoes before you turn around '' . She sounded so exactly like Doaty that Henrietta obeyed her under the clear impression that she could either comply or stay home . Folly danced , eager for whatever lay beyond the door . To a Blackwell , there was only one church . The cemetery slumbered just behind it , and the way lay through the village and close to the sea . For the first time in thirty years , Henrietta walked down the narrow street with its shuttered shops just stirring and its inhabitants eying her with the frankest curiosity . She smiled and bowed , recalling the princess-in-a-carriage feeling she had enjoyed when she was a child . Now , some of the acknowledgments were cautious , but all were interested . An old man , sitting against the wall of a cottage and waiting for the sun to find him , gave her a more than reflective look as she passed , the sap still plainly rising in his branches . On an impulse , she turned back and said good morning . He cupped his ear and shook his head at her repetition , announcing in a nettled way that he had heard her the first time . He then offered his own estimate of the weather , which was unenthusiastic . `` Summer's been slow to come '' , he said . `` It's my dryin' out time '' . He scowled at her flowers . `` I'm taking them to the cemetery '' , said Henrietta , out of a vague feeling of hospitality . `` They'll be takin' me next '' , he said pleasantly , `` but not so soon's they plan . See half of 'em in their graves before I choose my own coffin . It's dryin' myself out that does it '' . He regarded her with rising hope . `` You'd like to hear how I go about it '' . `` It's nice of you '' , Henrietta said doubtfully . `` Y're welcome '' . He straightened himself , soldierly against the wall , and pulled his sprawled feet together so they stood side by side in their old boots . His stick ceased to be a thing to rest his chin on and became a pointer for emphasizing the finer aspects of his text . `` Every month , f'r three days '' , he said happily , `` I take no water into my system , no water whatsoever . It rests the tissues '' . Henrietta murmured that she could quite see how it would , and he nodded approval of her womanly good sense . `` Rests the tissues '' , he said , `` and pacifies the system . My dad did it , and he lived to a great age '' . He looked up at her sharply . `` Don't remember , do you '' ? ? She did suddenly , through the link of memory with his father , old Titus , who must have been in his nineties when Henrietta ran away . Next to the Blackwells , Titus had owned the island most , and she and Adelia had often stood in front of him , silenced by his terrible years -- a scanty man with a thin beard and very deep-set blue eyes like a mariner , more aged than possible . He had never spoken once to the awed sisters , but his son had been friendly , a big fellow of fifty or more , a fishing-boat captain and powerful like the sea . It must be that son who sat before her now , shriveled to half his size and half his senses . She said gently , `` Of course I remember you '' . `` Not so well's I remember you '' , he said . `` Y're the young Blackwell woman . Ran away on a black night with a lawful wedded man . I know all about you '' . `` You do seem to '' , said Henrietta , impressed . `` Can't blame a man for leavin' his wife '' , he said quite cheerfully . `` Left mine many a time , only she never knew it . Man in a boat , there's a lot of places he can put in at and a lot of reasons he can be away for a bit . Any harm in that '' ? ? `` Probably '' , said Henrietta dryly . He gave a short hard laugh and looked at her knowingly . `` You'd be the one to say '' , he observed , and she found herself liking his approval none too well , but she could not defend herself and say that her actions were `` different '' , since all actions had their own laws . Only , this old man's connivance was even less to her taste than Selma Cotter's open censure . Well , she had not come back to Great Island to be understood , praised or condemned . She had come to make her peace with the past , and of that past this ancient of the earth was only a kind of shadow . She started to move away , just as a woman came out of the cottage , a big-boned , drab-haired figure with a clean apron tied over her limp print dress . She smiled vaguely at Henrietta and spoke to the old man . `` You've not had your breakfast yet , gran'dad '' . `` Y'r dam' porridge is no breakfast '' , he said . `` Milk and sops '' ! ! He beat the air with his stick , and it fell from his claws and clattered on the stones . `` He's lowly today '' , his grand-daughter said wearily , and bent to pick it up . `` He's got this idea about drying out '' `` It ain't an idea '' ! ! `` If it ain't an idea '' , she said , `` how comes it you can drink beer but not water '' ? ? He looked piously to heaven and said , `` Beer don't affect the tissues none '' , and the ingenious hypocrisy of this defense pleased Henrietta so that she forgave him his stint of malevolence . His grand-daughter sighed . `` Come on , do . The children are eating , and Miss Blackwell's on her way somewheres '' . `` To the graveyard . Who ain't '' ? ? `` Not me . I've got a day's work to do . -- You'll be visiting Miss Doaty , Ma'am '' ? ? Henrietta nodded . How much they knew about her ! ! The woman ( she must have been a tiny baby when Hetty and Delia had stood arm in arm , watching great age grow small ) answered the nod with her own . `` God rest her soul , she was a sweet one . Come on now '' . She put a strong hand under the old man's arm and lifted him up , patiently , with the gentle cruelty and necessary tyranny that the young show toward the very old . He mumbled at her but let himself be led off inside the house , shuffling mightily to make it clear how weak and aged he was and how he was buffeted about by those who still had their wicked strength . There was a gabble of voices from indoors , young hungry sounds like cats after fish , and a burst of swearing from the old man . Henrietta looked down at her bouquet , still lively with its color and scent , and set her feet on their journey's way again , leaving the village street and crossing the first field , Folly dancing ahead of her . At the edge of the field , the wild rolling land took over , dotted with fat round bushes like sheep . They were covered with tiny white blossoms , their scant roots clawing at the stony ground , and wild birds darted in and about and through them so they were nearly alive with the rustle and cry . The air was full of sounds too but placid ones , a terrestrial humming as much out of the earth as out of the blue sky . She felt mindless , walking , and almost easy until the church spire told her she was near the cemetery , and she caught herself wondering what she would say to Doaty . Both church and graveyard were smaller than she remembered them ( how many things had lessened while she was gone away ) but the headstones had grown so thick in thirty years that to find one named `` Dorothy Tredding '' seemed suddenly impossible . She sat down on the nearest , fallen with age and gray with sea-damp , her fingers tracing the indecipherable carved letters padded with green moss . The day's sun was gathering its strength in gold , and she wished she had brought her parasol , if only to shade Doaty's flowers . A small , rock-carved angel watched her from a nearby tomb , the only angel in the cemetery . She remembered , suddenly , a night of savage moonlight and scudding clouds when she and Adelia , having dared each other , had stolen out of their great safe house and come here , hand in hand , hoping and fearing ghosts . The Momoyama family had come from Miyagi Prefecture , in the northeast of the main Japanese island of Honshu , where there are still traces of the mysterious Ainu strain . The Ainus were a primitive people , already living on the island before the principal ancestors of the Japanese came from Southern Asia . Apparently they were of Caucasian blood . They had white skins and blue eyes ; ; all their men were bearded , and many of their women were beautiful . A pitiful few of them are left now , to subsist mainly on the tourist trade and to sing their ancient tribal chants , which have the same haunting sadness as the laments of the American Indians . Most of them have been assimilated , but sometimes a man in Miyagi or Akita prefectures is much more hairy than the average Japanese , and occasionally a girl will be strikingly lovely , her coloring warmed and improved by a little of the tawny honey-in-the-sun tint of the invaders from the South . Tommy Momoyama was one of these fortunate occasions . She was taller than most Japanese girls , and had the exquisitely willowy form of the Japanese girl who is lucky enough to be tall . Her nose was higher of bridge , her complexion so pale as to be quite susceptible to sunburn , and the fish and vegetable diet of her forebears had given her teeth that were white and regular and strong . Her mouth , soft and full , was something for any man to dream about . She had black eyes , long and intriguingly tilted , and the way she walked was melody . She had been in Japan just one week . It was an alien land , and she hated it intensely ; ; she was already considering putting in rebellious requests for duty at San Diego , Bremerton , the Great Lakes , Pensacola -- any place the Navy had a hospital -- with a threat to resign her commission if the request were not granted . Anywhere would be better than the land of her ancestors . There was nothing wrong with her job . Tommy had been assigned to the psychopathic ward . There were no depressingly serious cases : the ward doctor sometimes teamed up with the chaplain to serve as a marriage counselor -- sometimes the Navy sent people back to the States to preserve a marriage -- but mental health as a rule was very high . At present the doctor's main concern was in seeing to it that Japanese salvage firms were not permitted to operate on the hulks of warships sunk too close inshore , because the work involved setting off nerve-shattering blasts at all hours . Tommy was interested in psychiatry , because there was much an understanding nurse could do to help the patients . But she suffered in her off-duty hours . Such as now , when she sat at a table in the coffee shop at the Officers' Club , having coffee and a hamburger to sustain her until dinnertime . She had changed into a cocktail dress , and the whole evening should have been before her , but already she was beginning to get a tight feeling at the back of her neck . This was one of the Navy's crossroads -- you find them all around the world . Ships from the West Coast rotated on six-month tours of duty with the Seventh Fleet , and Yokosuka was the Seventh Fleet's principal port for maintenance , upkeep and shore liberty . Sooner or later , all the gray Navy ships came in here ; ; if Tommy sat long enough , she would be sure to see all the young officers she had met in San Diego and Long Beach . And she wanted desperately to see someone she had known back there . She felt , rather than saw , the approach of the good-looking young man . He came through from the Fleet Bar , which was stag , with the ice cubes tinkling in a glass he carried . When he saw Tommy sitting alone , the tinkling sound stopped . He was perhaps a trifle tipsy , having been long at sea where drinking is not permitted , and consequently out of practice ; ; he wore a brown tweed sports jacket obviously tailored in Hong Kong , and he was of an age that marked him as a lieutenant . Probably off one of the carriers -- an aviator . There was a fifty-fifty chance , perhaps , that he would be unmarried , and an even more slender chance that his approach would be different . Japan did something to a man -- and it wasn't just Japan , either , because the same thing applied anywhere overseas . It was as if foreign duty implied and excused license ; ; it intimated that the folks at home would never know about it , and , therefore , why not ? ? Then the young man in the brown sports jacket spoke , and it was no different . `` Harro , girl-san '' ! ! He said , turning on what was meant to be charm . `` You catchee boy-furiendo ? ? Maybe you likee date with me '' ? ? `` I beg your pardon '' ! ! Tommy said out of her cold rage . `` I don't believe I know you , and I can't understand your quaint brand of English -- it was meant to be English , wasn't it '' ? ? The nice-looking young officer fell back on his heels , open-mouthed and blushing . At least , he had the decency to blush , she thought . `` Oh -- I'm sorry ! ! You see , I thought -- I mean I really had no idea '' -- `` Oh , yes -- you had ideas '' ! ! Tommy interrupted furiously . `` All wrong ones '' ! ! Then she jerked her thumb toward the door in a very American gesture , and dropped into Navy slang . `` Take off , fly-boy '' ! ! `` Uh -- sorry '' ! ! He muttered , and took off , obviously feeling like a fool . The trouble was that there was no lasting satisfaction in this for Tommy . She felt like a fool , too . It hadn't been this way in college , or in nurses' training ; ; it wasn't this way in the hospital at San Diego . Everybody had accepted her for what she was -- a very charming girl . Nobody had addressed her in broken English at any of those places , nobody had suggested that she wasn't American . There are Spanish girls who look like Tommy Momoyama , brunettes with a Moorish hint of the Orient in their faces ; ; there are beauties from the Balkan states who are similarly endowed , and -- back in the blessed United States -- they were regarded simply as pretty women . Now , having been sent halfway around the world on a job she had not asked for , Tommy was being humiliated at every turn . She looked around , self-consciously . Four little Japanese waitresses were murdering the English language at the counter -- Yuki Kobayashi happened to be one of them . Everybody but Tommy seemed to think it was charming when they called , `` Bifutek-san '' ! ! For a steak sandwich , or `` Kohi Futotsu '' ! ! For one cup of coffee . Two other Japanese girls were sitting at the tables , both quite pretty and well groomed . One was with a whitehaired and doting lieutenant commander ; ; the other was with her American husband and their exceptionally appealing children . Seeing these did nothing for Tommy's mood . She told herself rebelliously , and with pride , I am an American ! ! And so she was , and would remain . But she was learning that so long as she was in this country , and wore civilian dress in the Club , there would always be transient young men who would approach her with broken English . There had been occasions when some of the more experienced had even addressed her in what might have been perfectly good Japanese . Tommy wouldn't know ; ; after coming to America , her parents had spoken only English . One thing was becoming increasingly sure . She had been sent to the wrong place for duty . There was more to service in the Navy Nurse Corps than the hours in the ward . One had to have friends , and a congenial life in after-duty hours . Now there was raucous male singing from the Fleet Bar . It was terribly off key , and poorly done , and Tommy could never admit to herself that male companionship was a very natural and important thing , but all at once she felt lonesome and put-upon . She finished her hamburger and drank her coffee and paid her check ; ; she got out of the coffee shop before the incident could be repeated . Eating while angry had given her a slight indigestion . Back in her living quarters at the hospital she took bicarbonate of soda , and sulked . Then , after a while , she went to her mirror . It was all true . She certainly looked Japanese , and perhaps she could not really blame the young men . And , still , they did not have to be so crude in their approach . There was a letter to write to her mother , and she tried to make its tone cheerful . She promised that she would soon take a few day's leave and visit the uncle she had never seen , on the island of Oyajima -- which was not very far from Yokosuka . And tomorrow she would take time to shop for the kimono her mother wanted to present to the young wife of a faculty member as a hostess gown . Tommy , of course , had never heard of a kotowaza , or Japanese proverb , which says , `` Tanin yori miuchi '' , and is literally translated as `` Relatives are better than strangers '' . Actually , this is only another way of saying that blood is thicker than water . Doc Doolittle's scheduled appearance at captain's mast was a very unusual thing , because the discipline dispensed there is ordinarily for the young and immature , and a chief is naturally expected to stay off the report . But the beer hall riot in Subic had been unusual , too , and Walt Perry was convinced that Doc had started it through some expert tactics in rabble rousing . Just why anybody should wish to start a riot the executive officer didn't know . In his opinion , Doc had not grown up . The lieutenant was not entirely wrong in the belief . There had never been a good reason for Doc Doolittle to grow up . He had come into the Navy too young , with the image of the fun-loving Guns Appleby before him . The war found him much too early , and its perils -- and especially its awful boredom -- were best forgotten in horseplay and elaborate practical jokes , and even now Doc had never found any stabilizing , sobering influence . He remained young at heart , with an overdeveloped sense of humor . He wisecracked about the captain's indoctrination of new men , took great delight in slaughtering cockroaches with ethyl chloride , and gave no thought for tomorrow . He was doing thirty years , and the Navy would take care of him . The job security enjoyed by Doc Doolittle , and nearly all members of the Armed Forces , is a wonderful thing . Actually , all a man in uniform has to do is to get by . He may not rise to the heights , but he can get by , and eventually be retired . Doc had been under restriction to the ship since the Bustard left Subic . This deprived him of liberty in Hong Kong , but he told Boats McCafferty that Hong Kong was a book he had read before , and the Navy would always bring him there again , some day . At Yokosuka he was restricted to the confines of the Base because Walt Perry , being thoughtful , knew that Doc might have to draw some medical supplies from the hospital or the Supply Base . This gave Doc the whole range of the naval establishment , and suited him quite well . There were two things he wanted to do : inspect one of the many caves that had been dug into the hills on the Naval Base , and visit an old shipmate . A telephone line had been hooked up to connect the ship with the Base exchange . After supper , Doc called Whitey Gresham , who was now a lieutenant and had a family . `` Well , Doc , you old sonofabitch '' ! ! Whitey exclaimed , with true affection . `` Come over and have a drink . We live down by the Base commissary . Grab a taxi '' . `` I'll be there , but I'll walk '' , Doc said . `` I've got to run an errand on the way . See you in about an hour '' . He threw a smart salute at the gangway , went up the dock , and turned down the wide street in front of the Petty Officers' Club . How , he wondered , does one enjoy one's spare time ? ? He considered some interesting excursion but he was on the road every day from dawn to dusk . Then there was exercise , boating and hiking , which was not only good for you but also made you more virile : the thought of strenuous activity left him exhausted . Perhaps golf , with a fashionable companion -- but he'd lost his clubs , hadn't played in years . There was swimming over at the Riverside Hotel , but his skin was so white he looked like the bottom of a frog . Perhaps a packing trip into the Sierras , let his beard grow -- but that was too stark . I could , he thought , take a long walk -- but where ? ? The telephone rang . `` You missed it '' , Buzz's voice said , `` You should have gone over to the Pagan Room with us . Wow . Strippers , but scrumptious , and Toodle Williams and her all-lesbian band '' . `` Hi , Buzz '' , Owen said . `` I went over to the Willows and dropped two notes '' . `` Tough '' , Buzz said , `` Listen , we're having a stag dinner over at the Pagan Room on Friday . Imagine a stag dinner with Toodle Williams '' . He laughed and laughed . Owen wanted to be pleasant because Buzz worked the territory next to his , but he hadn't come to Reno for stag dinners . `` Thanks '' , Owen said , `` but Friday is a long way off and anything can happen '' . Buzz was a tireless instigator who never let his victims rest . When Owen was finally rid of him , there was a timid rap at the door . `` Yes '' , Owen called out . `` Yes '' ? ? `` I'm Mrs. Gertrude Parker '' , a soft voice explained , `` And I'd like to talk to you for a few minutes , please '' . Ahah , he thought , a lush divorcee at last . Probably saw me in the lobby . He was disappointed to find a nervous , scrawny woman with a big hat standing at the door . She frowned at his green pajamas with the yellow moons . `` How do you do '' ? ? She said , semi-professionally . `` Our church is sponsoring a group of very courageous women up in Alaska . We call them lay-sisters and they go among the Eskimos making friends and bringing the light . They're up there in that freezing climate and all of us have to try and help them '' . `` Oh '' ? ? `` You see '' , she said , looking past him into the room , where the highball glasses sparkled dully in the bright light , `` you and I can't understand the many hardships they have to undergo '' . `` Why is that '' ? ? She apparently wasn't satisfied with his reaction . Smug , Owen thought , smug and sappy . There was a slight nervous twitch in the region of her left eye . It gave her a lewd , winking effect . `` Have you ever tried to reason with an Eskimo '' ? ? She asked , winking wildly . `` They are a very difficult group of people '' . `` I don't know much about them '' , Owen admitted , `` but I suppose they have their own religion and they probably resent outsiders coming in and telling them what to do and what not to do '' . She smiled in a sickly-tolerant fashion . `` You know , that's very interesting . People don't know how much they give away about themselves by remarks like that . The more canvassing I do , the more I note how far most people are from their personal God '' . Forebearing , Owen kept his peace . What would happen next ? ? That she was out for a touch was certain , but when did she get to the pitch ? ? Several people passed in the hall and stared as he slowly retreated , trying to close the door a little , and she slowly leaned toward him and raised her voice . `` How did you get by the desk '' ? ? He asked curiously . `` I'm sure the hotel doesn't know you're wandering around the corridors , knocking on strangers' doors and talking down Eskimos '' . `` Oh , I just come once a week . Every day I visit a different hotel . I feel it's my duty . I do this work all on my own , because I understand the difficulties and I want to help these lay-sisters . Do you know these women go all through Alaska , and they don't have the proper facilities ? ? They travel in pairs as much as a hundred-and-fifty miles a day '' . `` Do you have any idea how far I travel every day ? ? I have the whole Pacific Northwest '' . Owen was aware he was getting overexcited but he couldn't help himself . Mrs. Gertrude Parker drew back . `` That's hardly a Christian approach '' , she remonstrated . `` You're in the secular world '' . `` I didn't say it was Christian . I don't think you'll find many active Christian salesmen . Not that religion isn't big business ; ; those bibles and prayer books make a lot of money for publishing houses , but they don't get top personnel . Our key salesmen are in appliances and cosmetics '' . `` God , I take it , plays no part in this '' , she said waspishly . `` God doesn't have any appliance or cosmetics '' , he said heatedly before he caught himself . It sounded silly ; ; why go on ? ? More people were passing ; ; he had to find some way to close this impossible conversation . `` And whiskey '' , she said , smiling and blinking at the highball glasses . `` Don't forget whiskey ; ; it's such a big seller '' . `` You know '' , he said , getting a grip on himself , `` I think you're going to have to excuse me . I have an appointment '' . `` I can imagine '' , she said . `` Probably down at the bar . But what do you want to do about the lay-sisters ? ? They must be freezing up there now . Can't you help them '' ? ? `` Leave a card or something . I'll think it over '' . `` I have no card '' , she said bitterly . `` You haven't been listening to what I've been telling you . I only hope my talking to you has helped you a little , anyway , because you need spiritual bucking-up '' . She looked crestfallen , as if he had somehow disappointed the whole human race . She stood indecisively for a moment , then walked down the hall ; ; he heard her knocking on another door . It took him about fifteen minutes to calm himself ; ; then he realized he was hungry . He showered , shaved , dressed and went down to the dining room for breakfast . On the way he stopped at the desk to receive his mail . There was a check from his company , and the usual enthusiastic bulletins on new lines they always issued . His lawyer had sent him a statement on his overdue alimony , and there was a letter from the Collector of Internal Revenue asking him to stop in his office and explain last year's exemptions . He ate breakfast in a sullen mood , but afterwards , when he walked out onto Virginia Street , he felt braced . He looked off to the crest of the Sierras , still white-topped ; ; the glisten of the Truckee River made a wide spangle . He felt suddenly elated , adventurous . With any luck at all he could easily find a flowerpot . Although it was only three o'clock , he stopped in at the Golden Calf . The tables were all spinning , the dice rattling , the bar crowded . Just to test himself , he played roulette for quarters on his old combination , five and seventeen , and within an hour , he had won , surprisingly , twenty dollars . The way was opening up ; ; when the management brought around champagne , the breakfast settled its whirling around in his stomach . The Golden Calf was dimly lit with shaded neon . There were more women than men in the place , but he couldn't find a flowerpot . They all had the hard look of gamblers who had stopped dreaming , who automatically turned the cards , hardly caring what showed up . The mural around the wall depicted early settlers in covered wagons , who appeared much more animated than the gamblers . The women had a bright shining expectancy as they leaned out from the wall and gazed splendidly into the distance , while the men were stern but hopeful . All , of course , except the Donner party who were bent on starving to death . `` I wonder if they did eat each other at the end '' , Owen mused . He sat down next to a heavily-upholstered blonde , but she was cleaned out in twenty minutes . She sighed a dirty word and left . Owen was surprised to see Mrs. Gertrude Parker playing the one-arm bandits that were cunningly arranged by the entrance . She sat down and played two slots at once , looking grim , as if bested by mechanical devices , and Owen felt sorry for the lay-sisters depending on her support . A dried-up cowboy sat down next to him in the blonde's place . He was a little more authentic than usual because he smelled slightly of the stables . `` What you need is a steady martingale '' , the cowboy announced after watching Owen play . `` You can't build on your hit-and-miss five-seventeen '' . `` What are you playing '' ? ? Owen asked . `` I'm just logging '' , the cowboy explained . `` I keep all these plays in this little black book , and I watch over a twelve-hour period to find out what numbers are repeating . But roulette's not my game . I'm always trying to find a breaking table in blackjack . Incidentally , I'm pretty famous in these parts : I'm called The Wrangler '' . `` Nice to know you . Don't you have to spend any time on your ranch '' ? ? `` Well , of course I do . I'm with the Bar-H , pushing a horse called Sparky . He's my own horse , and what I collect from him I use on blackjack . This Sparky can rack and single-foot and he's the fastest thing in Washoe County . I figure if I can get any kind of publicity campaign going , I'll land him on TV -- you know , one of those favorite horses for some Western hero . I once trained a horse for Hoot Gibson , but nothing like Sparky . He's a pinto and he photographs wonderfully '' . Five came up while Owen was listening to The Wrangler and he neglected to play , a loss of ten dollars . This proved conclusively that The Wrangler was a jinx , so he walked on down to Hurrays , an even more glorified gambling den than the Golden Calf . When he looked in the back , Mrs. Gertrude Parker was marking keno cards . His adventurous spirit had waned ; ; he studied the pistol exhibition that Hurrays featured as an added attraction . He ogled a long redhead with green eyes , but she was a shill with her money in front of her . He had no great prejudice against shills ; ; it just seemed such a dry run . There was no cash around ; ; everyone was flipping silver dollars . The management discreetly withdrew the green stuff into the office and gave the customers chips or checks or premium points . He read a special announcement whereby Hurrays would feature a special floorshow at three A.M. starring Adele ( The Body ) Brenner and fourteen glamorous schoolgirls . He wondered if he might bag a tourist , but they looked frightened of him . He passed two brides , both wearing orchids , and they made him feel a little sad . Owen found Buzz watching chuck-a-luck . Buzz had on a Hawaiian shirt and was carrying some sun-tan oil and dark glasses . He was shorter and fatter than Owen , who felt good standing next to him . `` We're all going over to Lake Tahoe and try our luck at Cal-Neva '' , Buzz explained , still instigating . `` We ran into a guy at the Pagan Room who guarantees we can beat the wheel . He started out as a stickman , then became a pit boss until the Club found him crossroading . He was knocking down checks at faro '' . `` I'm allergic to Tahoe '' , Owen explained . `` Something about the pollen '' . `` Well , okay '' , Buzz said . `` We'll see you around later '' . Owen went over to the crap table and the dice were hot , but he couldn't pyramid with any consecutive success . `` How's your luck , honey '' ? ? A short platinum blonde in a bursting sun-suit addressed him . She looked well-fed and prosperous , but he didn't get the impression he was being propositioned the way he'd been hoping . `` I haven't had any luck since I was a baby '' . `` Stake me '' , she said , `` and let me at those dice . I'll make them dance the tango . We'll get it in a hurry and get it out '' . `` Let's have a drink and discuss a merger '' . `` If you go broke '' , she said , smiling up at him , `` I'll leave you '' . `` Sounds like real love '' , Owen said . `` It sort of brings a lump to my throat '' . `` My name's Gisele '' , the blonde said after she ordered a Scotch . `` Named after the ballet . My mother wanted to call me Sylphide , but it sounded too affected '' . Spencer said nothing . `` Is there any word you would like to offer in your own defense '' ? ? Spencer shook his head . Alexander said , `` Answer me properly , Spencer '' . Spencer was quiet for a moment longer , then he said , `` There is nothing I want to say , Captain '' . `` Very well '' . Alexander walked away . Naval procedure , he thought , had its moments of grim humor . Philip Spencer had cold-bloodedly planned the murder of his captain , yet it seemed in order to chide him for a lapse of proper address . During the morning hours , it became clear that the arrest of Spencer was having no sobering effect upon the men of the Somers . Those named in the Greek paper were manufacturing reasons to steal aft under pretence of some call of duty , so as to be near Spencer , watching an opportunity to communicate with him . Hostile glances were flashed at both Alexander and Gansevoort . The two met in the Captain's cabin . `` What is the next step , Captain '' ? ? `` More arrests , I fear '' . In your opinion , who is this E. Andrews on the ' certain ' list '' ? ? `` Cromwell , of course . He is the oldest and most experienced of the lot . He saw the dangers , not the glories of being identified as a mutineer . Somehow he talked Spencer into letting him use another name '' . There was a tap at the door and Oliver entered with the word that Heiser wished to see the Captain . `` Have him come in '' . Heiser , breathless and wild-eyed , brought the chilling news that the handspikes , heavers and holystones had been mysteriously removed from their customary places . `` And also , sir , two articles which were considered souvenirs now must be regarded in another light entirely . An African knife and battle-ax are at this moment being sharpened by McKinley and Green . McKinley was overheard to say that he would like to get the knife into Spencer's possession and that '' -- `` Where did you gather all this information , Heiser ? ? Who reported to you the disappearance of handspikes and heavers and who '' -- He was interrupted by a crash from the deck and sprang toward the ladder , with Gansevoort and Heiser behind him . A glance revealed that the main topgallant mast had been carried away . The aimless milling about of what had been a well-trained , well-organized crew struck Alexander with horror . He bellowed orders and watched the alert response of some of his men and watched , too , the way a dozen or more turned their heads questioningly toward the shackled figure as though for further instruction . Adrien Deslonde hastened to Alexander's side . `` Small violently jerked the weather-royal brace with full intention to carry away the mast . I saw him myself and it was done after consultation with Cromwell . I swear it , sir '' . And it was clear that Adrien was not mistaken , for both Small and Cromwell took no step toward aiding in the sending up of the new topgallant mast till Philip Spencer had given the signal to obey . Then , with disappointment evident upon their faces , they moved to the work . Alexander guessed that they had planned confusion and turmoil , thinking it the ideal climate in which to begin battle and bloodshed . Their strategy was sound enough and , he reasoned , had been defeated only by Philip Spencer's unwillingness to sanction an idea he had not originated . When the mast was raised , Alexander gave the order for Small and Cromwell to be placed under arrest , and now three figures in irons sprawled upon the open deck and terror stalked the Somers . Spencer's potential followers were openly sullen and morose , missing muster without excuse , expressing in ominous tones their displeasure at the prisoners being kept in irons , communicating with the three by glance and signal . One of the missing handspikes came out of its hiding place after Midshipman Tillotson had been insolently disobeyed by Seaman Wilson . Tillotson had reported the man to Gansevoort and an hour later , with back turned , had been attacked by Wilson , brandishing the weapon . Wilson , shackled and snarling , was thrown with the other prisoners and was soon joined by Green , McKee and McKinley . Not a man on the brig , loyal or villainous , could be unaffected by the sight of seven men involved in the crime of mutiny . In the tiny cabin , Alexander met with Gansevoort , Heiser and Wales to speak and to listen . Three days had passed since Spencer's arrest and each day had brought new dangers , new fears . Gansevoort said , `` It requires an omniscient eye to select those if any on whom we can now rely . To have the Greek paper is not the great help that at first flush it seemed . From actions aboard , it is easy to guess that Spencer's boast of twenty staunch followers was a modest estimate '' . `` Well '' , Heiser ventured , `` why don't we hold an investigation with questioning and '' -- `` That would be worse than useless '' , Alexander broke in . `` There is not space to hold or force to guard any increased number of prisoners . Besides , suppose we hold a court of inquiry , then what ? ? Then we have informed a large number of our crew that when they reach the United States , they will be punished but that in the meanwhile , they may run loose and are expected to perform their jobs in good order . Mr. Heiser , does this sound like a truly workable plan to you ? ? Do you not think these men might choose the black flag here and now '' ? ? Wales said , `` Of course they would . They are about to do so at any moment as it is . All that is needed is for one man to feel self-confident enough to take the lead . As soon as that one man is appointed by himself or the others or by a signal from Spencer , we are going to be rushed . We are going to be rushed and murdered '' . `` That is extravagant language , Mr. Wales . We are not going to be rushed and murdered '' , Alexander said . `` We are going to bring the Somers into New York harbor safe and sound '' . `` Of course , I agree with the Captain '' , Gansevoort said thoughtfully , `` but the conspiracy is ferocious and desperate . The instinct of discipline has been lost . Anything is possible when anarchy has the upper hand '' . He paused , then added , `` Everything on a ship is a weapon . Implements of wood and iron are available for close and hasty combat no matter where a man stands . And we are positive of so few and suspicious of so many '' . `` We ourselves must stand sentinel '' . Alexander said . `` Under arms day and night , watch and watch about . Those of us present , the Perry brothers , Deslonde and the other midshipmen now have the responsibility of the Somers . A great deal of labor we have as well , for we are too uncertain of where trust may be placed '' . And when he was alone again in the cabin , Alexander lowered his head into his arms and wept , for he knew full well what must be done , what in the end would be done . With all his heart he had loved the Navy and now he must act in accordance with the Navy's implacable laws . And when he did , when he gave to his ship that protection necessary to preserve her honor , he knew he would lose forever the Navy to which he had dedicated his soul . Where had he failed ? ? How had he failed ? ? He who had tried so hard , who had yearned so passionately to be a great officer . It came to him as he wept there aboard the Somers that it was as foolish to strive for greatness as to seek to storm the gates of heaven . It was given or it was not given . One did one's best and if fortune smiled , there was a reward . One did one's best and if fortune frowned , an eighteen-year-old boy with murder in his heart sailed aboard one's ship . And Alexander sobbed like a girl for the dreams he had had , and he felt no shame . God knew his tears were his to shed if he so desired , for it had not been with an egotist's rage for fame that he had held precious his naval career . Another field had given him fame enough to satisfy any egotist . It was for love that he had served the Navy . To have someday that love returned was what he had lived for . Now the hope was gone . Yes , he would bring the Somers safely into New York harbor but at a price . Dear God , at what a price . And after a while , he dried his tears and walked the deck as a captain should with assurance and dignity . Stern-faced , he inspected the prisoners , satisfying himself that they were clean , well fed and comfortable within reason . The prisoners averted their eyes but not before he had glimpsed hatred and anger . Only Cromwell , the giant boatswain , was mild-mannered and respectful . He said , `` Captain , may I speak , please ? ? Captain , I am innocent of any plot against you or the ship '' . `` Are you , Cromwell '' ? ? `` Yes , sir . Before God I swear I am innocent . I know nothing of any plot , if there is such a thing '' . `` You are the only man aboard who can be in doubt '' . `` I cannot speak for others , sir , but I am innocent '' . He leaned closer to Alexander , squinting up at him from the deck . `` Surely , Captain , you did not find my name on any suspicious paper or anything '' . `` No , Cromwell , I did not find your name . You were careful about that '' . Now Spencer , seeming with effort to shake himself from lethargy , spoke . He said , `` Cromwell is telling you the truth . He is innocent '' . Alexander shifted his gaze to Spencer . The calmness and detachment of his tone suggested unawareness of how implicit was his own guilt in the words he had used to defend Cromwell . Alexander knew Spencer too well to think him naive or thick-skulled . And in a sudden wave of painful clarity , Alexander recognized a kinship with Spencer . Here was another human who understood the stupidity of quarreling with the inevitable . There was good fortune and there was bad and Philip Spencer , in handcuffs and ankle irons , knew it to be a truth . He expected nothing for himself but that which naturally follows those marked for misfortune . The red-haired captain , towering above the prisoner as a symbol of decency and authority , was shocked to find himself looking with sympathy upon Philip Spencer . This tragic lad had forged his own shackles . But he could not have done so , could not have found the way , had fortune favored him . And because fortune had favored neither the prisoner nor the red-haired captain , they would be each other's undoing . `` Spencer , if there is guilt , if you do not deny your own , how is it possible for Cromwell to be innocent ? ? He was your constant companion '' . The hazel eyes met Alexander's . `` I tell you he is innocent '' . `` And do you think there is a reason why I should accept your word '' ? ? `` Yes . I have nothing to gain by defending Cromwell '' . `` Nothing to lose , either , Spencer '' . `` That's true '' , Spencer agreed and withdrew himself from the conversation . His eyes went back to contemplation of the sea . `` I am innocent , Captain '' , Cromwell said again . `` Before God , Captain , I am innocent '' . And though it was logical that a man who could plot mass murder would not hesitate to speak an untruth , still it was difficult to understand why Spencer spoke only for Cromwell . The boatswain was as guilty as any . No action of his could be interpreted in his favor and four midshipmen , prior to their knowing the significance of the Greek paper , had seen it in Cromwell's hands while Spencer whispered explanations . `` I thought '' , Midshipman Rogers had told Alexander , `` that Spencer was teaching him geometry '' . It was fantastic to turn from the seven men in shackles to the wardroom , where a class of apprentices awaited him . This was a training ship and the training would continue , but there was an element of frightful absurdity here which Alexander recognized . Some of these apprentices were , in physical strength , already men and doubtless a percentage of them were Spencer's followers . Rachel steered me along toward a school for young boys beginning to study the Torah . Bits of trash lay in the roadway . The air smelled warmish and foul . A young man appeared out of a side alley and walked toward us with quick strides . He wore a long double-breasted coat of a heavy material , dark trousers , and black boots with buckles . His black hat with its wide brim , high crown , and fur trim rode high . With his head erect , he approached , not glancing at us , and passed by with his clear eyes raised and fixed straight ahead . He had a pinkish-white complexion , a small straight nose , a short black beard , and tightly curled paot . I was suddenly conscious of my bare arms . The girls in the market place wore long-sleeved dresses and covered their legs with cloth stockings . I turned and watched him stride down the center of the road . His hands were swinging at his sides , and he passed through the dingy market place with his back straight and , pivoting on his heel , he entered an old stone building . Rachel had seen me watching the young man . She smiled . `` When your mother was here he must have been a young boy . Like the ones you will see now '' . I swallowed hard and looked down at my feet plodding along beside Rachel . She led me into a twisting side alley . The dirty , discolored buildings looked boarded up , and their few windows stood high above our heads . Rachel said that schools and synagogues occupied most of the buildings . We entered one where the front door stood ajar and climbed a flight of steep steps to the main floor . An old man with a white beard and dressed in a long shabby coat , baggy trousers , and a black skullcap greeted us . Rachel talked to him . He nodded , clasping and unclasping his hands over his paunch , and flicked glances at me . I thought he would ask us to leave because Rachel and I were bare-armed , but he looked down into his beard and preceded us down the corridor . His toes pointed out toward the walls . He stopped in front of a door , placed a finger on his lips , and , still peering down into his beard , pushed open the door to a classroom . We stepped inside . He left us . Little boys crowded together on long wooden benches , and in the center of the room sat the teacher . His black beard dripped down over the front of his coat . One white hand poised a stick above his desk . He turned his surly , half-closed eyes toward us , stared for a second , then shouted in Yiddish , `` One , two , three '' ! ! Rapping the stick against the desk . The little boys shrilled out a Yiddish translation or interpretation of the Five Books of Moses , which they had previously chanted in Hebrew . They chanted a fixed tune in time to the report of the stick . Each boy opened his small mouth wide and rocked back and forth on the bench in the way his grandfather and great-grandfather had studied and prayed in the ghettos of Europe . The boys were tiny . They had large bright eyes , the small upturned noses of all babies everywhere , and hair cropped short except for the long ringlets of paot framing their little white faces . They bent over yellowed prayerbooks and looked up only to watch the teacher . Since they did not glance curiously at us once , I guessed that there was a penalty for distraction . The guttural language from the ghetto stopped . The teacher plunged the children into a new portion , this time in Hebrew , rapping the stick incessantly . One boy who rocked back and forth over his worn book had bright red hair and freckles . His tightly curled paot hung down to his narrow shoulders . In the center of his brilliant curls sat a small black skullcap . His head barely rose above the table . I stared at him for a long time . He did not return my interest . My eyes traveled over the bare walls and up to the one partially open window high above the little figures and back to the boys . Some of them ignored the texts and had apparently memorized the words long ago . They singsonged the portion at the teacher , who accompanied them in an off-key baritone and spurred them on with the stick . The tapping defined the rhythm and kept the boys awake . I could not keep my eyes away from the boy with the red hair . His body pitched back and forth on the bench . His front teeth were missing . I shuddered and backed out of the room . Rachel followed , looked at me , and clucked with her tongue . We walked down the cool hall silently . From behind us came the rapping of the stick and the high-pitched voices of the boys who would grow to devote their lives to rigid study and prayer . I said , `` How long do they keep that up '' ? ? `` All day '' , she said . `` Except for Shabbat , when they are praying all day '' . I rubbed my hands together . They had turned numb and prickly in the classroom . The old man in the baggy clothes waited at the foot of the steps . He glanced down into his beard and muttered something in Yiddish . Rachel said , `` He asks for money '' . She passed by him . I reached into the pocket of my skirt , fingered ten pruta , and dropped the coin . Then I picked it up again and handed it to the old man . He thanked me . I didn't look at him . I grinned at Rachel . `` Does this bother you '' ? ? I said . She smiled to herself . `` Most of our Sabras think it's horrible . When we were fighting , a few of our orthodox people were lying down in the roads so we could not pass . They said that we must not fight but wait for the Messiah '' . I was amazed . You had to have convictions to lie down in the road in all those clothes and appear as though you might wish to turn yourself out of your own home . You had to be stupid or crazy or immortal . And I wasn't . I was American . You had to know , also , that you were going to fail . All of it might have been heroic , but they had done it in the wrong place . I resented them . Rachel faced me . Her bright eyes were twinkling . She said , `` Sometimes I think they are keeping religion for us while we play around . Your mother hated this way of life . She wished to change much for the children here '' . I said quietly , respectfully , `` What did she do here ? ? In this section '' ? ? Rachel clicked her tongue behind her teeth . `` Here , nothing . But when she saw the children you have just visited , she wanted to take them away and put them out in the country , in the kibbutzim . She loved the children . She was a strange woman , your mother . When she loved , it was with a passion that drove her along and carried along with her those things she loved . Nothing was too impossible for her to do when she wanted . She stayed here to work for Aliah . For many immigrants , for many children , the first thing they knew of Israel and freedom was your mother . Sometimes it was dangerous for her '' . Rachel grinned slyly . `` But she loved danger . She took it with her wherever she went ; ; she chose it . And I think she sought out danger as much as she sought out helping other people . She was most strange woman . Ready to follow her impulse . It was an impulse when she was here in Me'a She'arim -- I was with her -- that led her to stay in Israel . Your mother wanted to bring children to Israel so that they could leave their ghettos . Here they did not need to be in ghettos . If she could not take the children out of this section , at least she could take other children out of their countries and put them on the farms . She set out to make sure that no Jewish child anyplace in the world had to live in a place such as this '' . I said quietly , gaining nerve , ready to ask any question at all , no matter how intimate , ready to be rebuffed , `` Then why did she leave Israel ? ? I'd like to know that very much '' . Rachel clasped her hands together and slowed her pace . The soles of her sandals reported sharply on the cobblestones . She pursed her lips , then clamped them together so tightly that I thought she was angry with me . But she sighed and her face relaxed . `` Trouble came into her life . She had good friends here , people who liked her . Who loved her . But she had to go out and hurt herself . There was a man here in town . He helped her meet people so she could go out and do the work she wanted . She worked very hard . There was a refugee who was able to come here because of her . He came with his son . At first I thought they were relatives of your mother , but it was not so . This refugee was a middle-aged man , a big , handsome man with a strut to his walk as I have never before seen . He had the black numerals on his arm , so he had been branded in a concentration camp . Yet he walked like a young man . Often he was terribly despondent and talked to no one . Then he would walk off for a few days alone in the direction of Europe . All his family was dead , except for his son . Your mother would always retrieve him when he wandered off , and she would send him home to his son . He loved the son and was always glad to be sent back to him . Then his son did something '' -- Rachel threw up her hands -- `` I don't know what , but something , to an official here -- it was during the Mandate -- and the son was imprisoned . A few hours after the son was arrested , your mother was informed . She ran from a little group of us . We were sitting together , talking . She went to the father and found he had hanged himself '' . Rachel paused . It was silent in the stone alley . Then she continued with energy , `` I myself did not see her until a week after she had run off to find the father . No one saw her except the man Reuveni '' . `` Yes '' , I said . `` I know him '' . Rachel gave me a direct , bright-eyed look . She said , `` Reuveni wanted your mother to give up her deep interest in this refugee . He said she would only hurt herself . He complained to me once that I must talk to her . When I did , she shrugged her shoulders and said that Reuveni wanted her to marry him . I asked her if she would , and she said she would not . He had known when he first helped her to meet the right people and work with them that she did not intend to marry him . Anyway , I did not see her until two weeks after the refugee hanged himself . She came to me one day . She was pale and skinny ; ; she was terribly alone . And she said that after this man had been dead for a week she had gone to Reuveni and accepted his proposal . He shouted at her and told her he loved her and couldn't understand why she had upset herself . But now he was happy she would let him straighten out her life and take care of her . He would never let her harm herself again . For one whole week he never let her stay alone . She let him lead her around . He took her to a doctor , for she was run down , nervous , did not care where she was . Reuveni took her with him wherever he went . He did not let her talk to people ; ; he did not let her choose her own food . She was limp and beaten from her loss ; ; she did not care . `` And I'll take you with me '' . The two of them against the world . That had been how she imagined it . For when he began to talk and dream all at the same time , making his plans as he went , she had begun dreaming too . But now the dream was over . The big waking up had happened . `` What did I imagine '' ? ? She thought . `` Did I see him about to swing low in a chariot ? ? Or maybe poling up the south fork of the Forked Deer River braving the wastes dumped in it ? ? Maybe I saw him on a barge with a gang of Ethiopians poling it '' . And I'll take you with me . He had taken her all right . Wednesday nights after youth fellowship . Out of the church and into his big car , it tooling over the road with him driving and the headlights sweeping the pike ahead and after he hit college , his expansiveness , the quaint little pine board tourist courts , cabins really , with a cute naked light bulb in the ceiling ( unfrosted and naked as a streetlight , like the one on the corner where you used to play when you were a kid , where you watched the bats swooping in after the bugs , watching in between your bouts at hopscotch ) , a room complete with moths pinging the light and the few casual cockroaches cruising the walls , an insect Highway Patrol with feelers waving . And the bed that sagged in a certain place where all the weight had been put too many times before and the walls fine and thin for overhearing talk in the next room when Gratt went out for ice , the sound coming through the walls like something on the other side of the curtain , so you knew they heard you when they were quiet and while you lay wondering what they had heard you listened . And Gratt Shafer would be in Memphis today for the wedding rehearsal and then tomorrow he would marry just like everybody knew he would , just like everybody knew all along . Like Mattie and the mayor up there gripping the microphone and Toonker Burkette back in his office yanking out teeth , like they all knew he would . Just like the balloon would go up and you could sit all day and wish it would spring a leak or blow to hell up and burn and nothing like that would happen . Or you could hope the parachute wouldn't open just so you could say you saw it not open , not because you meant any harm to Starkey Poe in his suit of red underwear , but mainly because you were tired of being an old maid -- a thing which cannot admit when it thinks it might be pregnant , but must stand the dizzy feeling all alone and go on like everything is all right instead of being able to say to somebody in a normal voice : `` I think I'm pregnant '' . You could wish that . Or you could wish your daddy would really do it -- kill Gratt Shafer like he said when you all the time , all along , could feel the nerve draining out of him like air out of a punctured tire when you are on a muddy road alone and it is raining and at night . So you sit in the car and listen to the air run out and listen to the rain and see the mud in front of the headlights , waiting for you , for your new spectator pumps , waiting for you to squat by yourself out there in your tight skirt , crying and afraid and trying to get that damned son-of-a-bitch tire off , because that is being an old maid too , if you happen to drive a car , it is changing the tire yourself in the night , and in the mud and the rain , hating to get out in it but afraid to stay and afraid to try to walk out for help . And every sound that might be the rain also might be the man who thinks after he has raped you he has to beat your brains out with a tire tool so you won't tell , a combination like ham and eggs , rape her and kill her , and that is being an old maid too . It is not having his baby nestled warm and fat against your breast and it is not having somebody that really gives a damn whether some tramp cracks your skull . And most of all it is not having the only man you could love , whether he drives a bread truck or delivers the mail or checks the berry crates down at the sheds , or owns seventeen oil wells and six diamond mines , for if you are anybody what he is or does makes no difference if he is the one . He can even be a mild-voiced little-town guy with big-town ideas and level gray eyes and a heart even Houdini couldn't figure out , how it is unlocked . And he can be on the way to Memphis , your Gratt Shafer can , and you discover you can stay alive and hate him and love him and want him even if it means you want him -- really want him -- dead . Because if you can't then nobody else can either , nobody else can have him . For you don't share him , not even with God . If it is love , you don't . And I'll take you with me . Even if that's all the promise he ever gave or ever will give , the giving of it once was enough and you believed it then and you will always believe it , even when it is finally the only thing in the world you have left to believe , and the whole world is telling you that one was a lie . Even when he is on the way to Memphis you will still have the promise resting inside you like a gift , and it is he inside of you . And in a way the promise works out true , for whether he wants you or not , you go with him in your heart . You feel him every mile further away . You feel where he is and what he sees , and at night you feel when he is asleep or with the other woman , the one that never could love him the way you do , the one who got him because she didn't particularly give a damn whether she got him or didn't . And you know you will always wonder all of your life whether it was because you wanted him so bad that you didn't get him , and you can feel nearly sorry enough to cry when you think of that other guy , the chump who begged you to marry him , the one with the plastered hair and the car he couldn't afford and the too-shiny shoes . You think : `` Did he feel that way about me '' ? ? It comes to you that probably he did feel that way to let you use him like you did when you couldn't have Gratt Shafer ; ; that he must have since he was there like the radio for you to turn on or snap off when you got tired of him , that other guy . It dawns on you that instead of a lump to fill the seat across the bridge table from you , he was a man , and that because Gratt Shafer was making you miserable , you were passing it down to him , to Gratt Shafer's substitute , that other guy . And you wonder if that is why the little man lost his job and his car and stayed drunk about a year before he straightened out and moved to St. Louis , where he got to be a big unhappy success . You wonder if he looks at his wife now and thinks of you . You wonder about the Christmas card with no name on it , and it comes to you that maybe it would have been better to have made somebody else happy if you couldn't be happy yourself , to give somebody else the one they wanted -- to give them you . `` Damn the world '' , she thought . She looked out at the corn field , the great green deep acres of it rolled out like the sea in the field beyond the whitewashed fence bordering the grounds . The mayor envisioned factories there . Homes and factories and schools and a big wide federal highway , instead of peaceful corn to rest your eyes on while you tried to rest your heart , while you tried not to look at the balloon and the bandstand and the uniforms and the flash of the instruments . The bands were impatient , but they were the only ones . The others , the ones in the stands , were spellbound , for hearing the mayor was for them like listening to a symphony was for sophisticated folks in New York City . It was like being in the concert hall in the afternoon and hearing the piano virtuoso rehearsing . He was good and they knew that what he was doing for them he would do all over the United States some day . So they stayed quiet and hung not on what he said but on how he said it , not listening exactly , but rather , feeling . If a man was good , if he was going to be governor , you felt it and you wanted him to go on forever . You were sorry when he finished talking because while he was up there you were someone else and the world was something else too . It was a place full of courage and hope and you were part of it . You laughed and then your chest swelled and you felt you could cry for a little bit , and then a feeling hit you like a chill in your stomach and the goose bumps rippled along your arm . He hit the theme about dying to defend your country , and you were ready to do it right then , without a second thought . While he talked you wouldn't trade being a West Tennessee farmer for being anything else in the whole damned world , no matter if it hadn't , in six weeks , rained enough to wet a rat's ass . She glanced at the man nodding beside her , a man with weather cracks furrowed into his lean cheeks , with powdery pale eyes reflecting all the droughts he had seen , reflecting the sky and the drought which must follow now in August -- yes , with eyes predicting the drought and here it was only June , only festival time again and thoughts of Gratt Shafer would not leave her . `` I should have stayed at the store '' , she thought . Back at the Factory-to-You with the other old maids , back there she was the youngest clerk and she was thirty-four , which made her young enough to resent the usual ideal working conditions , like the unventilated toilet with the door you had to hold shut while you sat down . There was no lock because Herman didn't allow a lock . A lock on the toilet would encourage malingering and primping . The toilet hadn't had a sincere scrubbing in years and there were things written on the walls of the little boxed-in place because you couldn't keep the public out -- entirely . She could not count the times Herman had rapped on the door , just a couple of bangs that shook the whole damned closet and might , someday , break away the pipe connections from the wall . The two little bangs meant that he was getting impatient to have a crowd of customers waited on and that if he had to he would jerk open the door and drag out , by the opposite door handle which she would be clutching , whichever-the-hell clerk it was who thought she could waste so much store time on the pot . And the hours were six-thirty in the morning until eleven at night on Saturdays and during sales , and there were no chairs and you couldn't smoke and the cooling was overhead fans and there was no porter or janitor . Among us , we three handled quite a few small commissions , from spot drawings for advertising agencies uptown to magazine work and quick lettering jobs . Each of us had his own specialty besides . George did wonderful complicated pen-and-ink drawings like something out of a medieval miniature : hundreds of delicate details crammed into an eight-by-ten sheet and looking as if they had been done under a jeweler's glass . He also drew precise crisp spots , which he sold to various literary and artistic journals , The New Yorker , for instance , or Esquire . I did book jackets and covers for paperback reprints : naked girls huddling in corners of dingy furnished rooms while at the doorway , daring the cops to take him , is the guy in shirt sleeves clutching a revolver . The book could be The Brothers Karamazov , but it would still have the same jacket illustration . I remember once I did a jacket for Magpie Press ; ; the book was a fine historical novel about Edward 3 , , and I did a week of research to get the details just right : the fifteenth-century armor , furnishings , clothes . I even ferreted out the materials from which shields were made -- linden wood covered with leather -- so I'd get the light reflections accurate . McKenzie , the art editor , took one look at my finished sketch and said , `` Nothing doing , Rufus . In the first place , it's static ; ; in the second place , it doesn't look authentic ; ; and in the third place , it would cost a fortune to reproduce in the first place -- you've got six colors there including gold '' . I said , `` Mr. McKenzie , it is as authentic as careful research can make it '' . He said , `` That may be , but it isn't authentic the way readers think . They know from their researches into television and the movies that knights in the middle ages had beautiful flowing haircuts like Little Lord Fauntleroy , and only the villains had beards . And girls couldn't have dressed like that -- it isn't transparent enough '' . In the end , I did the same old picture , the naked girl and the guy in the doorway , only I put a Lord Byron shirt on the guy , gave him a sword instead of a pistol , and painted in furniture from the stills of a costume movie . McKenzie was as happy as a clam . `` That's authenticity '' , he said . As for Donald , he actually sold paintings . We all painted in our spare time , and we had all started as easel painters with scholarships , but he was the only one of us who made any regular money at it . Not much ; ; he sold perhaps three or four a year , and usually all to Joyce Monmouth or her friends . He had style , a real inner vision of his very own . It was strange stuff -- it reminded me of the pictures of a child , but a child who has never played with other kids and has lived all its life with adults . There was the freshness of color , the freedom of perception , the lack of self-consciousness , but with a twist that made the forms leap from the page and smack you in the eye . We used to kid him by saying he only painted that way because he was so nearsighted . It may have been true for all I know , because his glasses were like the bottoms of milk bottles , but it didn't prevent the paintings from being exciting . He also had , at times , an uncanny absent-minded air like a sleepwalker ; ; he would look right through you while you were talking to him , and if you said , `` For Christ's sake , Donald , you've got Prussian blue all over your shirt '' , he would smile , and nod , and an hour later the paint would be all over his pants as well . Mrs. Monmouth thought of him as her discovery , and she paid two to three hundred dollars for a painting . It was all gravy , and Donald didn't need much to live on ; ; none of us did . We shared the expenses of the studio , and we all lived within walking distance of it , in cheap lodgings of one kind or another . Attending the life class was my idea -- or rather , Askington's idea , but I was ripe for it , and the other two wouldn't have gone if I hadn't talked them into it . I wanted to paint again . I hadn't done a serious picture in almost a year . It wasn't just the pressure of work , although that was the excuse I often used , even to myself . It was the kind of work I was doing , the quality of the ambition it awoke in me , that kept me from painting . I kept saying , `` If I could just build up a reputation for myself , make some real money , get to be well known as an illustrator -- like Peter Askington , for instance -- then I could take some time off and paint '' . Askington was a kind of goal I set myself ; ; I had admired him long before I talked to him . It looked to me as though he had everything an artist could want , joy in his work , standing in the profession , a large and steady income . The night we first met , at one of Mrs. Monmouth's giant parties , he was wearing a brown cashmere jacket with silver buttons and a soft pink Viyella shirt ; ; instead of a necktie he wore a leather bolo drawn through a golden ring in which was set a lump of pale pure jade . This set his tone : richness of texture and color , and another kind of richness as well , for his clothing and decorations would have paid the Brush-off's rent for a year . He was fifteen years older than I -- forty-four -- but full of spring and sparkle . He didn't look like what I thought of as an old man , and his lively and erudite speech made him seem even younger . He was one of the most prominent magazine illustrators in America ; ; you saw one of his paintings on the cover of one or another of the slick national magazines every month . Life had included him in its `` Modern American Artists '' series and had photographed him at his studio in the East Sixties ; ; the corner of it you could see in the photograph looked as though it ought to have Velasquez in it painting the royalty of Spain . I had a long talk with him . We went into Mrs. Monmouth's library , which had low bookshelves all along the walls , and above them a Modigliani portrait , a Jackson Pollock twelve feet long , and a gorgeous Miro with a yellow background , that looked like an inscription from a Martian tomb . The fireplace had tiles made for Mrs. Monmouth by Picasso himself . Like certain expensive restaurants , just sitting there gave you the illusion of being wealthy yourself . In the course of our talk , Askington mentioned that he spent part of each week studying . `` By yourself '' ? ? I asked . `` No , I take classes with different people '' , he said . `` I don't think I've reached the point , yet , where I can say I know everything I ought to know about the craft . Besides , it's important to the way a painter thinks that he should move in a certain atmosphere , an atmosphere in which he may absorb the ideas of other masters , as Durer went to Italy to meet Bellini and Mantegna '' . He made a circle with his thumb and fingers . `` Painting isn't this big , you know . It doesn't embrace only the artist , alone before his easel . It is as large as all of art , interdependent , varied , multitudinous '' . He threw his arms wide , his face shining . `` The artist is like a fragment of a mosaic -- no , he is more than that , a virtuoso performer in some vast philharmonic . One of these days , I'm going to organize a gigantic exhibition that will span everything that's being painted these days , from extreme abstract expressionism to extreme photorealism , and then you'll be able to see at a glance how much artists have in common with each other . The eye is all , inward or outward . Ah , what a title for the exhibition : The Eye is All '' ! ! `` What do you study '' ? ? I asked . I was fascinated ; ; just listening to him made me feel intelligent . `` I'm studying anatomy with Burns '' , he replied . `` Maybe you know him . He teaches at the Manhattan School of Art '' . I nodded . I had studied with Burns ten years before , during the scholarship year the Manhattan gave me , along with the five-hundred-dollar prize for my paintings of bums on Hudson Street . Burns and I had not loved each other . `` I'm also studying enameling with Hajime Iijima '' , he went on , `` and twice a week I go to a life class taught by Pendleton '' . `` Osric Pendleton '' ? ? I said . `` My God , is he still alive ? ? He must be a million years old . I went to a retrospective of his work when I was eighteen , and I thought he was a contemporary of Cezanne's '' . `` Not quite '' . Askington laughed . `` He's about sixty , now . Still painting , still a kind of modern impressionist , beautiful canvases of mountains and farms . He even makes the city look like one of Thoreau's hangouts . I've always admired him , and when I heard he was taking a few pupils , I went to him and joined his class '' . `` Yes , it sounds great '' , I said , `` but suppose you don't think of yourself as an impressionist painter '' ? ? `` You're missing the point '' , he said . `` He has the magical eye . And he is a great man . Contact with him is stimulating . And that's the trouble with so many artists today . They lack stimulation . They sit alone in their rooms and try to paint , and only succeed in isolating themselves still farther from life . That's one of the reasons art is becoming a useless occupation . In the Middle Ages , in the Renaissance , right up to the early nineteenth century , the painter was a giant in the world . He was an artisan , a man who studied his trade and developed his craftsmanship the way a goldsmith or a wood carver did . He filled a real need , showing society what it looked like , turning it inside out , portraying its wars and its leaders , its ugliness and its beauties , reflecting its profound religious impulses . He was a propagandist -- they weren't afraid of the word , then -- satirist , nature lover , philosopher , scientist , what you will , a member of every party and of no party . But look at us today ! ! We hold safe little jobs illustrating tooth-paste ads or the salacious incidents in trivial novels , and most of our easel painting is nothing but picking the fluff out of the navel so it can be contemplated in greater purity . A bunch of amateur dervishes ! ! What we need is to get back to the group , to learning and apprenticeship , to the cafe and the school '' . He could certainly talk . The upshot of the evening was that I got the address of Pendleton's studio -- or rather , of the studio in which he gave his classes , for he didn't work there himself -- and joined the life class , which met every Tuesday and Thursday from ten to twelve in the morning . It was an awkward hour , but I didn't have to punch any time clock , and it only meant that sometimes I had to stay a couple of hours later at the drawing board to finish up a job . After a short time , both George and Donald joined the class with me so they wouldn't feel lonely , and we used to hang a sign on the door of the Brush-off reading out to work . It was mostly for the benefit of the mailman , because hardly anybody else ever visited us . In a way , Askington was right . `` Stimulating '' was the word for it . I don't know that it was always as rewarding as I had expected it to be . Partly , it was because Pendleton himself wasn't what I anticipated . I had come prepared to worship at the feet of this classic , and he turned out to be a rather bitter old man who smelled of dead cigars . No , that isn't quite fair . Actually , there was a lot of force in him , which is why I kept on in that class instead of quitting after a week . Such a little thing to start with -- the car registration . `` Ida , where is the car license '' ? ? She asked . `` I can't find it in the glove compartment '' . `` Via must have it '' , I answered readily enough , recalling her last visit . `` Via '' , she was frowning . `` Why should Via have it '' ? ? Had she forgotten she had signed the car away , that whatever they mutually owned had been divided among the children ? ? I was silent . I didn't want to stir things up . `` I drive my own car by courtesy of Via '' ? ? `` I'm sure she'd turn it over to you , if you'd rather . You know that '' . She looked as if she were accusing me of some fraud . `` She must have taken the registration when she went to Walter's . I'll call her '' . `` No , thank you . I want nothing of Via's '' . Why should this suddenly assail her ? ? Walter was giving me checks for my pay , the household bills . Had she been in such a turmoil that this had slipped her mind ? ? `` What a fool I've been '' , she said quietly . `` I knew all this , but I paid no attention . I don't even own the house I'm standing in . I was so sure it was all temporary that we would all embrace , and then the lawyer would tear up all those things `` It narrows down down down and finally there is no way out . If I am not to be Mrs. Salter I am nothing '' . I suppose I should have paid attention to that half-murmured remark , but it seemed one of those extreme statements women under stress indulge in . I love you , I hate you , I feel like killing you and myself , and in the same sequence I love you I think you're the most wonderful the most noble and so on and on , meanwhile eating a good breakfast and dinner and enjoying living . So I went about my business . I made a lemon sponge , a light dessert , roasted a chicken , parboiled some frozen vegetables , so there would be something nice in the icebox for the weekend . `` Don't bother , Ida '' , she said . `` I have these appointments in town for Saturday , and I'll probably spend Sunday with Dolly or the Thaxters '' . At last , I thought , she's recovering her spirits . With this movie-to-be in London , and new faces about her there , she would soon be a more tranquil , a wiser person , all the better for her stay out here . I felt more cheerful , as if I had had a part in bringing her through to a greater tolerance of herself . And I went back to my own cottage to live my own little patch of life . It was foggy that evening , but the path to my house was so well grooved that I could feel my way , accustomed as I was to the dense mists that rise from the sun-warmed palisades of the river and sometimes last for days . In the morning the fog was still thick so that to go to the village I crept along with my headlights full on . I did notice a twinkle of light from the big house through the woods but as I had left a light on in my own house because of the fog I assumed Mrs. Salter had done the same before she left for town . I did my shopping , had my dentist appointment , and from there I went to the women's lunch at our parish church where we discussed plans for the annual Christmas bazaar , so that dusk was beginning to gather when I drove home in the late afternoon . But the next day -- Sunday . Why , when I drove down to church , didn't it speak to me , seeing the lights still on and the day crisp and clear ? ? Prisoners brought to the dock accused of murder or accident say they cannot remember , and reading the accounts of their testimony you cannot believe that the mind can remove , absent itself , unsee . When I came back from church at noon Mrs. Thaxter was turning into the Salter driveway . Even at a car's length I could sense that something was wrong , and so I followed her up to the turnaround in front of the house . Dolly Engisch was waiting there on the steps and she came running toward us . `` She's nowhere , nowhere '' ! ! She screamed , and both women ran up to the house , and I followed . The search began , in all the rooms , running upstairs , down , opening closets , talking , exclaiming in rushes and gasps . Everything was as I had left it the night before last -- her portfolio and bag for town , her lingerie and dress and shoes laid out only her mink coat was missing . And she . Then the telephoning began . I , who until that day before had been Mrs. Salter's friend , her equal , was the servant now . It was Dolly and Mrs. Thaxter who were calling Via , everybody . And when they spoke they spoke to each other and not to me . And after I brought them sandwiches and coffee I had to go back to my place in the kitchen and wait . Sitting in the kitchen I recalled every word Mrs. Salter said that could have been a sign to me . `` If I am not to be Mrs. Salter then I am nothing '' . Why didn't that alarm me then ? ? And when she returned from taking her guests back to New York she had said , `` All they talked about was Harvie Harvie this , Harvie that When they know the truth will they drop away from me , will I become a nothing '' ? ? And then I remembered a few years before after their return from a short trip to Rome I had heard her boast , over and over again , `` On the boat people liked me for myself '' . I had made a habit of calling her at night from my cottage , just to check . The last night I had called , but the line was always busy and it reassured me . I assumed it was one of those hour-long conversations with Dolly or Constance , she comfortable in bed . But it seemed not from what they were saying . Then was it a final desperate plea from her , to whom ? ? Hanging on and on past any man's patience some final stab of conclusion ? ? She was found the day after at the bottom of the cliff . I tried to believe that what must have happened was that , restless , disturbed by this telephone call or whatever , she walked out in the night , as she had a habit of doing . Sometimes she took the path that winds up around my cottage to the walk at the edge of the cliff . It's so romantic up there , she used to say , with the broad river gleaming in its moontrack like an enormous dark mirror and all the sounds of the night , so poetic . With all that warm rain and the fog it might have been as simple as a loosened rock , a misstep . But I didn't really think it was as simple as that , nor did anyone else . When a fisherman brought her up in his arms , still , small , as if she were a child asleep , I began to shudder with a terrible excitement , almost triumphant , that I still cannot account for . Was it a hysterical release from the long strain of vigilance of those weeks ? ? That at last the vigilance , the will gives way ? ? Or what was it that , before Via , Sonny , Walter and all , I began almost to dance with shuddering and cry out , `` I knew she'd do it ! ! I knew '' ! ! Everyone stared at me and drew back . Their eyes turned cold and accusing , even Via's . And they have never changed . At the same time that I thought I understood her at long last and pitied her , underneath this knowing had there burned unquenched by my pity a fire of hate , an enduring envy that burst out in that ghastly outcry ? ? Was that what had given way in me ? ? Even now I am appalled at how little anyone knows of what they really are . It is absurd of course to say that that one exclamation estranged me from the family I considered my very own , but there it hangs , a cooling void that broke our close connection with each other . At the time I was filled with self-pity at this separation , but in the years since I have come to understand that the sight of me was painful to them after that outcry . In my person they would always remember that last long time of me alone with her , so if they told themselves that I could have prevented it , I can understand that by now and love them still , because everyone must justify , have a scapegoat for what is not to be borne . It is not their avoidance that rankles ; ; it is when I meet someone who was a close friend of the family , and therefore of mine , and they nod to me so coolly and walk away , that it hurts . I could tell them , but no one ever asked , why I had cried out so triumphantly at the sight of her body . No , I forget Mrs. Mathias , who had been away visiting a married daughter when it happened . She haunted me ; ; she persisted in explaining how and why she had advised Mrs. Salter to return to the country . `` We all feel guilty '' , I turned away from her coldly . `` It was nobody's fault . She overplayed her hand '' . `` What do you mean '' ? ? She frowned . `` Why put such a high value on being top dog '' ? ? I added . It was coarse , almost insulting , this harsh appraisal , and she has never come to see me since . But suppose she had not taken Mrs. Mathias' advice and lived on like thousands of women in towns , dispossessed of love , hanging on to makeshifts , and altogether and finally arid . If she chose , and in that final decision discarded , what , above all , all of us value , life itself , must she not have risen to her fullest height , and transcending her murky self , felt at last the passion of a great moral decision ? ? If they say I could have stopped her it is because they are ignorant of her last weeks of self-examination , her search into herself and its conclusions . Yes , I had cried out that I knew she'd do it , but without my fully realizing it at the time , it was a cry of triumph for her , praise at her deliverance from pettiness and greed -- and guilt . She was finally at rest in truth , of her own proud free choice . At rest with my darling Ellen , the first Mrs. Salter . Mr. Salter came home . The funeral service was in the house , the Methodist minister , how clean and glistening his eyeglasses and his neat body standing beside that coffin with that doll inside , a stranger speaking to strangers the old sacred words , and the rain drumming incessantly in accompaniment , seven days of relentless rain that turned the ground to mud so the burial had to be postponed . I waited . Then Via called to say they had decided to cremate her -- as they had Ellen , the thought leaped to my mind -- and did I want to meet her at the funeral home the next morning . The coffin stood on trestles in a corner of the long low dimly lit funeral parlor , on its dark shining surface the sheaf of white roses I had ordered . I knelt , just for decency I thought at the time , but found myself whispering , `` Our Father which Art in Heaven '' And it was only after that that something unlocked in me and I felt a grief . Via was in the parking lot when I went outside . Together we waited in her car until the hearse moved out and we followed it down into the heavy traffic of New Jersey . By the time we arrived and entered the building sacred music was already swelling out into the chapel-like auditorium with its discreet symbols of religious faiths . Again I felt impelled to kneel , and reached back and pulled Via down . Something would come into her heart if nothing else the sounds of Bach would give her some healing . `` I had a rather small place of my own . A nice bachelor apartment in a place called the Lancaster Arms '' . `` Uhhu '' , she said , hardly listening as she studied her left eyelid . `` And then I had another place farther downtown I used as a studio '' . `` Uhhu '' . `` I'm not a man who has many close intimate friends , Carla '' , he said , wanting her to know all about him . `` Oh , I'd drink with newspaper people . I think I was what you might call a convivial man , and yet it was when I was alone in my studio , doing my work , that I really felt alive . But I think a man needs at least one intimate friend to communicate with '' . Pausing , he waited for her to turn , to ask a question . She showed no interest at all in the life he had led back home , and it hurt him a little . `` Well , what about you , Carla '' ? ? `` Me '' ? ? She asked , turning slowly . `` What about me '' ? ? `` Did you make friends easily '' ? ? `` Umm , uhhu '' . `` Somehow I imagine that as you grew up you were alone a lot . How about it '' ? ? `` I guess so '' , she said taking a Kleenex from her purse . When she had wiped some of the lipstick from her mouth , she stared solemnly at her image in the mirror . `` Are your people still alive '' ? ? He asked , trying to touch a part of her life Alberto hadn't discussed ; ; so he could have something of her for himself . `` You talk so well , Carla '' , he went on . `` You seem to have read so much , you have a natural gift for words '' , he added , trying to flatter her vanity . `` You must have been good at history at school . Where did you go to school '' ? ? `` What is this '' ? ? She asked , turning suddenly . `` Don't you know all about me by this time ? ? My name's Carla Caneli . This is my town . I sleep with you . You know something more about me every day , don't you ? ? Would you be happier if I made up some stories about my life , told you some lies ? ? Why are you trying to worry me '' ? ? `` I'm not trying to worry you '' . `` Well , all right then '' . The cleansing tissues she had been using had been falling on the floor , and he got up and picked up one , then another , hoping she would notice what he was doing . At home he had been a clean orderly man , and now he had to hide his annoyance . Was she just naturally sloppy about everything but her physical appearance ? ? He wondered . Would he have to clean up after her every day , clean the kitchen , the bathroom , and get down on his knees and scrub the kitchen floor , then hang up her dresses , pick up her stockings , make the bed while she lay around ? ? He straightened up , ready to vent his exasperation , then grew afraid . If he dwelt on the indignities he suffered he would lose all respect for her , and without the respect he might lose his view of her , too . `` What's the matter '' ? ? She asked suddenly . `` Nothing . Nothing at all '' , he said quietly . `` Let's go out '' . `` Are those the only shoes you have , Sam '' ? ? `` What's the matter with them '' ? ? `` The heavy thick soles . Look at them '' . `` They're an expensive English shoe for walking around a lot . I like them '' . `` Sam , no one around here wears such heavy soles . Can't you get another pair '' ? ? `` Maybe I could '' , he said , surprised that she could turn from herself and notice anything about him . `` I'll get an elegant pair of thin-soled Italian shoes tomorrow , Carla '' . `` And I don't know why you want to go on wearing that outfit '' , she said , making a face . `` What's the matter with it '' ? ? He had put on the gray jacket and the dark-gray slacks and the fawn-colored shirt he had worn that first night in Rome when he had encountered her on the street . `` Oh , Sam . You look like a tweedy Englishman . Can't you wear something else and look a little more as though you belonged '' ? ? `` I don't mind at all '' , he said , delighted with her attention . Changing his clothes , he put on his dark-blue flannel suit , and laid away the gray jacket with the feeling that he might be putting it aside for good . But it was a hopeful sign , he told himself . She no longer wanted anything about him to remind her of the circumstances of their meeting that first night in Parioli . That day they loafed around , just getting the feel of the city . They looked at the ruins of the old Roman wall on the lower Via Veneto , then they went to the Farnese Gardens . She had some amusing scandal about the Farneses in the old days . Then they took a taxi to Trastevere . `` There's a church you should see '' , she said . And when they stood by the fountain in the piazza looking at Santa Maria he had to keep a straight face , not letting on he had been there with Alberto . He let her tell him all about the church . Then they had dinner . All evening she was eloquent and pleased with herself . When they got home at midnight she was tired out . And in the morning when he woke up at ten the church bells were ringing . He had never heard so many bells , and as he lay there listening , he thought of her scolding him for his remarks when he had looked up at the obelisk and the church at the top of the Spanish Steps . It was a good thing that she clung to her religion , he thought . She might like to take him to St. Peter's . `` Carla , wake up '' , he said shaking her . `` It's ten o'clock . Aren't you going out to mass ? ? You could take me to St. Peter's '' . `` Uhhu '' , she muttered . `` Come on , you'll be late '' . `` I think I'll sleep in this morning '' , she said drowsily , and as she snuggled against him , he wondered if she ever went to church . Why did he want her to go to church ? ? He wondered Probably because it was a place where she might get a feeling of certainty and security . It would be good for her . It was too bad he had no feeling himself for church . Not his poor mother's fault . She would have been better off if she had stuck to her Bible . As for himself , he just didn't have the temperament for it . From the time he had been at college he had achieved a certain tranquility and composure by accepting the fact that there were certain things he could never know . Then he thought of those Old Testament figures on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel . Just figures out of a tribal folklore . Could he honestly believe it would be good for Carla to have those old prophets gripping her imagination now ? ? Being a woman though , she would take only what she needed from church . It was too bad he wasn't a Catholic himself . Or a Protestant , or one of those amusing dogmatic atheists , or a strict orthodox Communist . What was the matter with him that they all wearied him ? ? It was the times , he was sure . All the ideologies changing from day to day , right under his eyes , so how could a man look to any one of them for an enlargement of his freedom ? ? It was all too wearying . Look somewhere else . But where ? ? Just the same , he thought , pondering over it , it would be a good thing for a girl like Carla if she got up and went to church . A half hour later he got her up to go out for breakfast so the Ferraros , hearing them hurrying down the stairs , would think they were going to a late mass . It seemed to him that if the Ferraros felt sure of them , could place them , it would help him to feel more sure of himself with Carla . `` Since we're having coffee with them this afternoon '' , he said , `` I think I'll ask the daughter if we can pay her to come in every day to clean for us '' . And he waited for her to say , `` Oh , no , I can do it , Sam . There's so little to do '' . `` Why not '' ? ? She said . `` I'm not good at that kind of thing '' . `` This afternoon let's take an air with them . Let's be fine superior people of great dignity '' , he said as if he were joking . `` If you find it necessary , Sam , go ahead '' , she said , turning on the stair . `` I am what I am . I can't help it '' . Her words remained with him , worrying him for hours . He didn't know how she would behave with other people . When they walked into the Ferraro apartment , the old lady , bowing and smiling , said softly . `` Ciao , '' and put out her hand . Her little brown face wrinkled up , her brown eyes gleamed , and with her little gestures she said all the courteous things . Agnese , smiling too , said , `` 'ello '' , and then more slowly , `` I am happy '' . And they sat down and began their little coffee party . The Ferraros offered them biscuits with the coffee . Acting only as interpreter Carla , her hands folded on her lap , was utterly impersonal . She would turn to them , then turn to him , then turn again . Watching her , he felt like a spectator at a tennis game , with the ball being bounced back and forth . Signora Ferraro , bobbing her head encouragingly , asked Sam about Canada , having a special interest . Carla translated . The old woman had a nephew from North Italy , a poor boy from a lumber mill who had got tired of the seasonal unemployment , and who had migrated to Canada to work on the railway . For a year the boy had lived in the bush in a boxcar . Did many of Sam's countrymen live in boxcars in the bush ? ? Had Sam ever lived in a boxcar ? ? She wanted to know . Regretfully Sam explained that he had no experience with boxcars . Just the same , the old woman said , she would write to her nephew in his boxcar and tell him she had met a nice man from his adopted country . And Sam thanked her , and hoped he might meet her nephew back home , and asked her if she had any further news of the Pope . A very great Pope , this one , the old woman explained , her black eyes sparkling . An intellectual . But very mystical too . It was said that he had had a vision . Just as thousands that day in Portugal had seen the sun dancing in the sky , he had seen the same thing later in his own garden , and she turned to Agnese for confirmation . Agnese had been sitting quietly , listening with the serenity of the unaware . Now a little flush came on her pale homely face and enchantment in her eyes . The Holy Father would die soon , she said to Carla , so she could translate for Sam , although he had a brilliant doctor , a man who did not need the assistance of those doctors offered by the great rulers of the world . Yes , the Pope could die and quickly be made a saint . No , he was indeed a saint now . Nodding approvingly and swelling with importance , the old lady whispered confidentially . There was a certain discontent among the cardinals . The Pope , in the splendor of his great intellect , had neglected them a little . There would be changes made , and Signor Raymond should understand that when the Pope died it was like the end of a regime in Rome . Jobs would be lost and new faces would become prominent . Did Signor Raymond understand ? ? Indeed he did , Sam said solemnly , trying to get Carla's eye . Surely she could see that these women were her Italians , too , he thought . Devout , orthodox and plain like a family she might meet in Brooklyn or Malta or Ireland . But Carla's eyes were on Agnese whose glowing face and softening eyes gave her a look of warmth and happiness . And Carla , watching in wonder , turned to Sam . `` It means so much to her . It's like a flame , I guess '' , she said in a dreamy tone . But one night Dookiyoon moved in the direction of the women's lodge , where Shades of Night had gone to purify herself . With the blue flesh of night touching him he stood under a gentle hill caressing the flageolet with his lips , making it whisper . He saw her emerge suddenly , coming in her unhesitant fashion , her back stiff , her head erect , facing with contempt the night and whatever she would encounter , as if in her extreme disdain and indifference she would pass by all the outraged looks of those whom she might approach . In her dark , scornful fashion she proceeded to her destination , afraid of nothing , not even the evil spirits which kept her company in her time of bleeding . Seeing her come , he caught his breath , feeling his heart bounce in him , and turned away , afraid now . Even he , wanting her , afraid of her and not knowing how to press his suit , feared the evil presences in her metabolism more . His breath caught , and , trembling , he closed his eyes and stumbled off . Going , he saw as often before some queer , hideous yellow face over his head , shining and weird like the old images which had invested him at other times like those that appear sometimes near the eyeballs when they are perhaps pressed by the thumbs . He cried out to her , his back turned . Then he fled , not waiting to see if she minded him or took notice of his cry . But she heard him go . Yet she did not hesitate and only turned slightly , her neck tall as she looked in his direction , and continued on her way toward the end of the camp . Elsewhere others heard and stopped and waited , the women peering from their lodges then gathering in small , curious clusters . Early Spring came from her bed , from beside her half-drunk husband , Walitzee , and stood at the entrance way to her lodge hearing the mild commotion , the sound of hushed voices . Standing there she saw Shades of Night come through the trees and stop beside the lodge , silent , almost imperious , her body taut , simply standing without speaking or moving while the wife of Walitzee waited , perhaps denying the dread that moved in her . When at last she could suffer the insult no longer , nor face the girl's scorn , she said in a voice overloud : `` I shall call your father ! ! Go back where you can bring no harm , or I will go and get the old man from his bed so he can see your shame '' ! ! But the girl said only , `` Tell him I am here , that I have come '' . And it was not Pile of Clouds she meant . But now with real anger at last , something proud and indignant , Early Spring stood like a she wolf before her den and cried , `` I will not shriek at you ! ! I will tell you to go , not begging . Telling you '' ! ! And unsheathing the knife she used for curing hides she stepped away from the lodge , holding the knife at her side . `` You bring only wickedness '' , she said and it was not to a child any longer but to another woman who had come to skirt her lodge with the cunning hunger of a wild animal . Speaking in a low voice of loathing she went up to the girl , who stood with the same upright , scornful bearing and did not even look at the knife . `` Go take helsq'iyokom , your evil spirit , to the young boys '' , the woman said . `` They do not have to face battle . I will not let your evil in . I will simply kill you first . Now go '' ! ! The other women had come close now , their voices murmuring together until they stood buzzing in an angry knot , their threats mingling , rising , nagging at each other , each trying to make her indignation and anger felt . They picked up sticks and hurled them at the girl . The sticks fell like a shower around her and she felt them sting her flesh and send tiny points of pain along her thighs . They were all shouting at her as if she were the embodiment of the evil she brought . But she did not move , taking the words and the sticks in that old defiance of her extreme youth until suddenly Pile of Clouds came howling among them , swinging a great bullhide whip . `` Go back to your lodges '' ! ! He shouted . `` A pack of dogs makes less noise '' ! ! He made the long whip sing and snap around their heads so that they ran screaming , some tripping over themselves in their flight . And Early Spring seized the whip and said : `` If you must flog someone , let it be her , your daughter . Drive the demons out of her and teach her to stay away from my husband '' ! ! But the old man turned on her , jerking the whip from her hand . `` Get into your hovel '' ! ! He spat . `` Go back to that double-married man of yours who so parades his fine body among the young women . Keep him back , if you must tell me what to do . I will be the one to confront my daughter , not the wife of him who leads her to sin '' ! ! She retreated before the naked shame in the old man and the fury beyond it and sank into the darkness of her lodge where Walitzee stirred , mumbling , sitting up in a half stupor to say : `` What worrisome thing happens ? ? I thought I dreamed of wolves fighting '' . But she went to him and pressed herself against his nakedness , smelling the stale odor of the whisky he had stolen from TuHulHulZote . She said , `` There is nothing that concerns you here . Lie back and go to sleep . But do not dream . Do not let the wicked spirits enter your brain '' . He sank back , sighing , and was soon asleep again . Outside , the old man , beyond all the curses of the spirits his daughter bore , went to her and twisted the gnarled talons of his fingers in her hair and turned her and pushed her rudely ahead of him into the trees where the moon sent out a thousand arms . And , shoving her against a spruce , her back to him , he retreated with the whip and made it whine and crack in the damp air , shortening its arc until it narrowed to her flesh and the sound of it snarled and cracked , settling its own cruel demons on her shoulders while she stood as unchanged , as dark and motionless as ever , her eyes open and staring at the pale delineaments of the bark so close to her face . She said to him , her father , `` How was I begotten , in pain or joy ? ? Is it for me to be forbidden the flesh you made grow on me ? ? They all know your foolish name '' ! ! She stared at the pale tracings on the tree , hearing her breath refracted from it , her face close and touching at time the rough edges of the bark . She felt the lash bite and heard her father say in crazed monosyllables words which had no meaning , like , `` unnnt ! ! Sssshoo '' ! ! The sounds of an animal in rage and despair . Suddenly the lash stopped fighting the air and she heard Pile of Clouds say in his high , quavering voice : `` Did you follow me to see my shame ? ? Move from the line or I will settle the whip on you . Move ! ! Do you hear the anger of the whip's whine '' ? ? Turning , the girl saw Dookiyoon standing between , his narrow shoulders unbent , his arms hanging long and resigned . He said , `` Let me take her blows , for there are demons in me too '' . Then , without knowing why , she found herself running from them , fleeing wildly through the trees , dodging her own shadows until she came to a little hollow in the rocky ground with a big stone in the center behind which she knelt and hid , listening to the madness of her heart and wanting for once to cry . For a while the young men waited outside the lodge of TuHulHulZote , glorying in his harsh language as he talked with himself . He shouted like a hoarse old mastiff , his hair stiff and bristling . He ranted and prophesied the doom of his enemies , walking in circles in and out of his living place , drinking stolen whisky in great , gasping draughts until finally , incoherent and sick , he fell into his own oblivion . He amused the young men who had been silent long enough . But they could taste the appeasement of violence and retribution through his antics . Now they moved , rubbing their flesh alive again , disdaining the gloom they saw in the faces around them . They came out and held their games and races . It was they who held the future in their hands . They went into the sun together and paraded grandly in their war clothes , painting their faces with the sacred attis dug far off in the cave of skeletons . They danced the paxam wildly at night , the war dance , and dipped their arrowheads in the venom of rattlesnakes and rode their horses in swift maneuvers , firing their few guns in unison at some indeterminate signal . Walitzee was among them , and Sarpsis , and they wore red blankets which flew like broad wings in the air of their passing . And a very young one , Swan Necklace , tried to emulate them and followed timidly . Yellow Wolf was there , nephew of the young chief by an older brother long dead , in whom also the disordered chemistries of youth worked . He would spring bolt upright suddenly after sitting quietly with inaction , because something had boiled over in his fermenting juices . All the young men , Alokut among them , challenged them in matched racing . They raced and maneuvered for war , swinging their horses in single file and then abreast like cavalry . At times they would ride frenziedly through the camp , letting the women see their courage , how handsome they were in their regalia . Then again they would stand in circles making other preparations . They combed their hair and streaked it at the part and greased the bangs so that the hair above their foreheads stood rigid like the tails of sage hens making love . Walitzee whitened his leggings with clay , knowing the girl watched from her place in the trees . He saw himself in a superior reflection , and he was as a speeding arrow from the taut bow , hurtling with a mad grace , his maleness shining and scented with meadow rue . He was always aware of the women's eyes which followed him , admiring him . And the suspicious , envenomed eyes of Pile of Clouds . And those of Early Spring , haunted and now full of hurt and envy . He felt so much like laughing ; ; even like shouting and crying out from the hilltops from which he could descend as an eagle in a mad caper from the cliffs . He and Sarpsis planned a great parade with the young men . They would give one final testimony of their challenge to let the people see their arrogance . They would ride with streaming amulets , their colors ripening in the sun , shouting the last bellicosity of a nation in the throes of death . And so the sun came up again and for a moment its color was the young men's blood , shifting then into the full heat and outcry which ran with their hearts . They mounted their horses and rode off into the hills . The , young chief stared at the wall of his lodge , , listening . The sound rose on the other side of the hills , vanished and rose again and he could imagine the mad , disheveled hoofs of the Appaloosas , horses the white men once had called the Dogs of Hell . He saw them in fleet images as they came rolling and now burst across the ridge . Standing then with the others , peering into the sun , he saw the bright , multicolored legion , their hair flying like dark banners , only the thunder , the roll of drums , the mad cacophony of the hoofs accompanying them . They leaned into the wind and seemed like one thousand-legged monster hurtling and plunging until suddenly they rose straight in their saddles and in one terrifying voice shouted , ejaculated their grotesque cry of war . She was moving through a screen of hemlocks , in among the white birch and maples . The sounds from the quarry began to pulse in her ears . She stood , once more listening . She had never been here at this hour . She felt as if some dark , totally unfamiliar shape would clutch at her arm ; ; but she found the path she always used , the stubs of branches she had broken , those she had pushed aside ; ; and she walked easily now , and more slowly , until she could see the dark glisten of water beneath her . If I ever committed suicide , she thought , I would dive straight down from here -- and no one would find me for days . She smiled , and expertly let herself downward , holding this known root or that , her sneakers sliding in the leaves . She jumped out onto the flat expanse of rock and , seating herself , shook her short-cut brown hair and tilted her chin far upward . The reedy music of the frogs had faded , but presently it began again , growing in volume until it was vibrant . Julia felt at peace and drew her legs up and clasped her hands tightly around the bent knees . She had accomplished a miracle . This was her place . The hour couldn't change it . Only -- only -- her thoughts were a little strange . They were becoming confused . Perhaps it was because it was so late , and because she had no business to be here now . She was thinking of Paul a few weeks ago , in the Easter holidays , with her at one of those awful Friday Evening Dancing Class parties her mother had made her attend . `` Hello , Julie , how are you '' ? ? And then off he went so casually , to someone else with breasts better developed , more obvious in a lower-cut dress , someone without a mouthful of wire bands and an inability to find words that would hold him . I wish he was with me now , she thought , and that we were both the ages we are and doing what was once only pretense and acute embarrassment . Oh God ! ! I wish I were older or younger , Julia Bentley thought . I wish so much someone loved me . George Rawlings remembered seeing the door open sometime during the night -- Millie , in a white robe , standing like a ghost at the threshold . She had vanished ; ; he must have slept again . He was staring at the blue china lamp left on beside him . It seemed too much trouble even to reach for the switch ; ; but of course the impossible effort of leaving would have to be made on this Monday morning . This room was like a prison . He would not be indebted to Sam ! ! Below him , as if at the end of some remote tunnel , he heard the humming of a vacuum cleaner . His fingers fumbled across the bandages . They had left both of his eyes uncovered . Well , he told himself , let's put the show on the road . He was walking across to the bathroom . He drank a glass of water and gripped the sink with both hands . A fearful pain had come from his head , as if the water were coursing up through the blood vessels and expanding them . He recognized his jacket and trousers . The fabric was dark ; ; the stains weren't too apparent ; ; and there were his shoes , thank God , but his shirt was one terrible mess . He shivered , and then tore away the blood-soaked parts and wound the rest around his neck like a scarf . Sam would be amazed to find him gone . Millie would have to understand . She must have put his clothes in the closet . He found a lump rising in his throat because of that one simple act of tidiness . He was on the verge of tears . Alex Poldowski -- in a fashion he owed a debt to that effete gentleman . At least Alex had told him he wasn't dying . Perhaps George Rawlings would be better off dead . What time was it ? ? He peered at his wristwatch . Strange , it was still running . A quarter to seven . Too early for a vacuum cleaner , but probably Sam wanted the whole house in order before he came downstairs . He was kneeling to tie his shoelaces . His fingers felt absurdly thick and clumsy . He rose slowly and looked into the mirror on the inside of the closet door . He barely knew himself . This was some freak , two strands of adhesive tape across his nose , like ugly roots from the mass of gauze , suddenly moist over his cheekbones . The surface , however , was perfectly white . He was drinking another glass of water . It was after seven o'clock . He was supposed to be in court this afternoon , at City Hall . Who would take over ? ? He'd have to think , but the main thing , the imperative necessity , was to leave before Sam Bentley was up and about , and before Millie detained him with sympathy . He entered the hallway . He was actually walking down the stairs . A plane up in the sky , above the clouds , and this freakish wreck of a man desperately trying to get away . `` Father , is that you '' ? ? The voice issued from the cavern of the hall below . George did not reply . `` Is that you , Father ? ? Who's there '' ? ? For a moment he felt like a thief discovered . Then Julia appeared under the arch leading to the dining room . She stood gazing at him . `` Uncle George '' ! ! He was trying to smile at her . `` Gosh ! ! You shouldn't be up , should you '' ? ? `` I -- I was just leaving here , Julie . I'm all set . Just about to call a taxi '' . She was wearing some sort of gray blazer . She seemed overly tall , her brow knitted in concern . `` Well , at least you won't have to do that '' , she was saying . `` I'm about to leave myself . I'll drop you off '' . `` You're leaving '' ? ? `` I'm going back to school '' , she answered . `` Pietro's driving me . I'm just finishing breakfast . But have you told Mother you were going '' ? ? She asked him . `` No . I just don't want anyone disturbed , Julie . That's my wish . It's quite a big one '' , he added . Her face seemed to float in an implausibly bright shaft of sunlight . `` Well , won't you come in then , have a cup of coffee -- or something ? ? Or maybe a drink '' ? ? She asked , in a way that seemed oddly sophisticated , considerate , and yet perhaps partly scornful . He tried to see her face more clearly . `` No -- nothing at all '' , he said after a moment's hesitation . `` I'll just wait for you here '' . He leaned his head against the wood paneling behind him , but the vivid red images of pain inserted themselves against his eyelids . He raised them . Julia moved past . `` I have to say good-bye upstairs . I won't be long '' . `` As a great favor , Julie '' , he said , `` please don't mention you've seen me '' . `` Not to anyone '' ? ? `` No -- please . `` I'll call your mother as soon as I get home . It'll be so much easier '' . `` All right '' She was staring at him . `` I'm fine , Julie . Please , you just go ahead '' . She had disappeared . He could feel a pulse pounding against the bandages . He imagined Sam's voice : `` George , what the hell goes on '' ? ? I wouldn't have the strength to answer , he thought . Maybe I couldn't have called a taxi . He could hear the footsteps overhead . He saw the suitcase , which Julia was holding . He stood up . `` I'll take that , Julie -- for you '' . `` Oh no '' , she said . `` I can manage '' . She went ahead of him . Outside the Lincoln was parked . He could hardly believe he was getting in . Pietro was gazing at him in an insolent , disdainful fashion ; ; but that didn't matter . We'll drop Mr. Rawlings off in Ardmore '' , Julia said , and for the merest second George was reminded of her father's tone with servants . To the manner born -- odd to have such a thought at a time like this ; ; yet her inflection seemed forced or rehearsed . He could not stop to analyze . He had never felt particularly close to her . Carrie seemed more affectionate , but obviously Julia had respected his request . He took her hand . `` I wish I didn't have to go back to school '' , she said , and then , `` I wish you lived in New York . That's in the opposite direction '' . `` I wish I did '' , he responded . `` I wish I wasn't wearing this ridiculous costume , and that we could go to a theater together , or a nice restaurant , forget we knew '' He stopped speaking . `` Forget we ever knew what '' ? ? `` Oh , just sort of everything in general '' . She said nothing until Pietro had slackened their pace . `` I know you feel badly , but that sounds like such a queer thing for you to say '' . `` Does it '' ? ? He asked . `` Yes , perhaps . I'm supposed to joke about things , aren't I ? ? But sometimes life can be rather a disappointing business '' . His voice seemed thick and purposeless . He relinquished her hand . He could see the stone building where he lived . Just a few more steps . Abruptly he reached into his pocket . Yes , there was the key . `` Are you positive you'll be all right by yourself '' ? ? She asked him . For a moment he smiled . `` Yes , Julie dear . You've done me the greatest possible service . By myself I'll be fine '' . `` Take care of yourself then '' . `` I will . You , also . Don't work too hard '' . It was an automatic phrase ; ; as he crossed through the courtyard he regretted it . He should have discovered a more tender farewell . Someone shouted at him , `` Well ! ! Will you look at George Rawlings ! ! What happened to you '' ? ? `` I bumped into a door handle '' , George said . Someone laughed . George walked steadily ahead into his entry . His bandages seemed on fire . He had shut his door with the brass number screwed to it . In the kitchenette the raw whiskey made him gasp . Just one or two swallows , he told himself , enough to lessen some of the pain . He was telephoning . `` No , Millie , I'm home . No , really , right as rain . Tell Sam not to worry about the car . I'll get it hauled away . No , please -- no visit today -- I'll be asleep . For God's sake , don't worry . That upsets me more than anything . Yes , sure , I'll see the doctor -- this evening , if you insist . '' There was one more call to make . `` Joan , did I wake you '' ? ? He asked . `` Yes , I thought you'd probably be up . Look , sweetheart , some fool was . Happened to be driving somewhat intoxicated last night . Unfortunately it turned out to be me , but I wouldn't quite put it that way to the boss . Oh hell no , I'm not in a hospital . I won't be in town for a couple of days , though , and there's that case I was supposed to handle this afternoon . Too bad a jury isn't involved . I might struggle in for a jury . I'd win hands down . But I thought maybe Tony Elliott could pinch-hit for me . He'll understand -- you might give him sort of a tactful nudge . He's got all the facts . I wouldn't want to ask for a postponement -- it's really just a routine thing . What ? ? No , darling I'd rather you didn't come out '' . A smile pulled at the lower strip of adhesive tape . `` Don't even send flowers . I'll see you Wednesday . I'll bribe you with a nice '' -- He was about to say `` double martini '' but thought better of it . `` I'll take you out to dinner . Okay ? ? '' He had put down the receiver . A strange relationship between Joan Fulbright and himself . Who knew about it ? ? She lived alone in the older part of the city , in one of those renovated houses whose brick facade some early settler had constructed . She had two tiny rooms on the second floor . She was a clever girl , a most efficient secretary . She let him come and go as he pleased , or as it pleased her . In the office you might have thought them only casual friends ; ; yet if he said : Make an excuse yourself , come out here today , she would have been on the next train -- and , similarly , if she had been in need , he would have gone to her . `` They make us conformists look good '' . `` That's a peculiar way to think '' . It wasn't just the obnoxious birds that had ruffled her own feathers , of course ; ; she knew that . It was Jim's `` little '' sister Myra , the unreliable , irresponsible , forever flyaway , Myra . She's a year older than I am , Lucy told herself . `` Come , come '' , Jim said , jollying Lucy a little . `` I love you . Susan ready '' ? ? Lucy listened . Obviously , Susan was not . Upstairs , busy feet , showering like raindrops , pattered around her room . Susan would be visiting her grandmother for only a few days , but even at seven she was a prudent soul ; ; she always packed for a lifetime , just in case . `` Not yet . Every doll in the house must be going with her '' . `` She'd better step on it . It's a long way to Websterville '' . Jim's fine young face was an expressive one , too ; ; as he looked at her , it registered anxiety . `` You know '' , he said . `` Myra wanted me to thank you for taking Cathy . It'll be only a couple of weeks before she finds a home for them in Paris -- but even so , she wants you to know that she's awfully grateful '' . Lucy did not believe him ; ; Myra appreciated nothing . Jim had put the thanks in his sister's mouth . `` Darling '' -- she said , and the single word mingled love and exasperation in an equal blend . `` She should have told me herself . And will it be only a couple of weeks ? ? Remember what happened the last time '' ? ? Leaving Cathy with them , Myra had gone out to the Coast for a supposedly brief visit ; ; but she had stayed all winter , and Cathy had stayed all winter too -- with them . Lucy suspected that Myra would never have come home if Gregg , Myra's husband , hadn't gone out to fetch her . `` That was an awfully long two weeks '' . For an otherwise silent moment , Jim's keys jingled nervously in his pocket . `` But she promised -- This will be different '' , he said at last . `` You've got to admit she was smart to scare up this fine government job over there -- she'll get a home for herself and Cathy in no time . You'll see , Myra's settling down '' . On the defensive , he added , `` I wish you'd think what it must be like for her to be without Greg , to be a new widow , a young widow '' . `` It depends on the widow '' . Lucy had an idea that Myra loved it . And not for one moment did she believe that Myra had settled down . It seemed to Lucy that all their married life , she and Jim had been doing nothing but rescue his sister from the constant crises that were her way of life . Remembering that succession of disasters , she now considered Cathy , an ominous child-cloud on her horizon . It was not that she disliked Cathy . The youngster drew her , troubled her depths ; ; whenever Lucy saw her , she tried , without noise or fuss , to give her the warmth she had never had from Myra . But Cathy was Myra's responsibility , not hers . `` I wouldn't even be surprised '' , she said unhappily , `` if Myra tried to leave her with us forever '' . Myra loved big cities ; ; thousands of miles away -- in Paris , of all places -- she might forget she had ever been a mother . Lucy knew her too well to find it impossible . `` That's a horrible thing to accuse her of '' ! ! Jim was so indignant it was obvious that no matter what he said , he too had seen the looming specter of a forever-Cathy . He went to the foot of the stairs and shouted up , fiercely , `` Susan ! ! Susan ! ! Get moving '' ! ! A startled piping sound returned . `` Don't yell at Susan '' , Lucy said . Was it only a few nights ago that they had been standing together in front of the house looking at the moon-washed river ? ? Their arms around each other , they had been talking of the present and the future ; ; their talk and their feeling had been as deep and warm , as steeped in light , as the air around them . Then , from within the still , sleeping house , the telephone had rung ; ; Myra , with her news , was on the other end of the line . Jim turned back from the stairway and looked at her . His dark brows , which had been lowered in anger , smoothed . `` Please '' , he said . `` There isn't a chance of Myra's letting anything like that happen . Let's stay friends '' . But they weren't just friends , Lucy thought ; ; they were husband and wife , and Myra had no right muddling and chilling their marriage . The only thing that had ever come between them was that worthless , selfish sister of his . Lucy was sick of it . `` Well , at last '' , she said , because Susan was clattering down the stairs . Susan looked like an overwhelmed baby nurse ; ; her arms were straining with a burden of dolls . `` I'm ready '' , she announced . `` Do you need that big bundle '' ? ? Jim said . His voice had sharp edges , as though he knew very well Lucy and he were not friends at the moment . `` All that junk '' ? ? Susan stared at him with hurt blue eyes that gushed an instant grief ; ; to her , each of her dolls was a real person with a living heart . `` Now , now '' , Lucy said , approaching Susan with a handkerchief , mopping skillfully . `` Your father didn't mean it , Susan '' . She gave Jim a quick , shape-up look of warning . `` She'll take every one of them '' . Jim groaned , but he lifted Susan's suitcase and said , in a gentler tone , `` Sure -- the entire thousand . And when you get back from Grandma's , Cathy will be here to play with you . Nice '' ? ? `` No '' , Susan said , grappling with her outsized armload of dolls with a Scrooge-like effect . And at this point , Lucy thought , there should be a lecture on little cousins' sharing dolls -- but she could sympathize with Susan ; ; there ought to be a limit to sharing , too . That was one more reason she didn't look forward to Cathy's visit , short or long ; ; the last one had been a Lilliputian war . She suspected that Cathy had been competing with Susan for attention that she had never had . `` Well '' , Jim said , out of the silence , `` let's get going , dolls and all '' . When the car , with Susan's hands waving wildly from the rear window , disappeared down the driveway , Lucy stood looking after its pale dust . The day was brilliant around her -- flower-scented , crisp with breeze -- yet her inner turmoil darkened it . She had let Jim go with a chilly good-by , a chillier kiss . She was sorry , and angry at herself , because never in their life together had she done that . She turned and began to walk toward the house . At the feeding station , the raffish group of cowbirds again bobbed and gobbled over the ground , but now , gorgeous among them , was a beautiful red cardinal , radiant in its feathered vestments . The handsome bird was solitary ; ; its mate must be at home , silently guarding their nest . She had better stay there , Lucy thought ; ; the sly female cowbirds took instant advantage of nests without sentinels . Well , Lucy ? ? She said to herself , abandoning the cardinals and the cowbirds . She had a day of things to do ; ; among them , she had to prepare the guest room . How long would it be occupied ? ? She wondered , with a baffled feeling of helplessness . As long as the unscrupulous Myra chose ? ? For a moment , her mind returned again to the strange , flying world of birds , and she said to herself . It isn't only birds that dump their children in other people's nests . In the sunshine of late afternoon , Lucy stood looking at the ready guest room . There were new yellow curtains , bright as a child's life ought to be , a new bedspread , lively with hopping rabbits , and hanging from the ceiling was an airy Mother Goose Mobile , spinning slowly in the breeze . A row of little hangers waited for a child's clothes in the neatly empty closet ; ; since Myra had always put most of Greg's money on her own back , Lucy suspected that no more than a few of that long row would be needed . The closet was faintly fragrant with lavender , and as Lucy shut the door an unhappy memory slipped into her mind , like a lavender ghost : Greg's house , on the day he was buried , and the child , pale , silent , baffled , watching the funeral guests with panicky eyes . Many times since his death that memory had worried and troubled her . Out in the hall , the upstairs phone shrilled , and the small ghost vanished . When she picked up the receiver , her mother's cheerful voice was there . `` Websterville Junction calling '' , she said . `` I just thought I'd let you know . Myra dropped Cathy this morning , and Jim picked Cathy up and left Susan a few hours ago . I'd have phoned sooner but I've been busy '' . `` I can imagine '' ! ! Susan was an active character ; ; for Mother to be able to call , Susan must be napping now , surrounded by her multitude of dolls . Lucy drew out the chair and sat down ; ; she relaxed a little , and some of the tension went out of her . You could think yourself as grown up as Methuselah , yet the maternal voice still kept its comforting magic . `` How was Cathy '' ? ? `` Subdued . But Myra was the merriest widow I ever saw '' . On her way to the airport , on her way to Paris -- you bet , Lucy said to herself . `` I've been fixing up the guest room for Cathy '' . There was a momentary pause , and then her mother said , `` How long is she supposed to stay '' ? ? `` Just for a couple of weeks , till Myra finds a place for them '' . `` Well '' -- This time there was a long silence , while the telephone hummed faintly with a voiceless life . Puzzled , Lucy stared at the flowered wallpaper ; ; her mother was forthright ; ; she was not usually given to mysterious silences . Was she thinking along the same lines Lucy was -- that it was quite possible Cathy might be left with her for good ? ? `` You mean once Myra gets to Paris '' ? ? Once the soft , pretty moth found the bright light she had always wanted ? ? Suddenly , seekingly , Lucy asked , `` Mother , do you know something I don't know '' ? ? Again there was that curious pause , and then her mother said , `` I guess I do . Just before Myra left -- She was saying good-by to Cathy , and she didn't realize I was near '' . She hesitated , as though hunting over words and ways of putting them . `` Cathy was in tears , of course , and I heard Myra say , ' Now be good , and at Christmastime I'll send you a wonderful present from Paris ' '' . Shocked speechless , Lucy sat there . Then she jumped to her feet , the elastic phone cord uncoiling like a black snake . `` Christmastime ! ! '' Then it was no bogey she had dreamed up ; ; it was only too true . Myra had no intention whatever of sending for Cathy in two weeks . For a moment , anger darkened the hallway about her , and when she found her voice , anger thickened it . `` That does it '' ! ! She said . `` I'll keep Cathy for two weeks . Then , if Myra does nothing about fetching her , I'll pack her right back to her mother -- if I have to take her myself '' ! ! Her hand tightened on the receiver . `` And that's what I'm going to tell Jim '' . For Lucy , the day's nagging to-and-fro had come to an abrupt end . As she hung up , she saw through the hall's open window the purple-black flying of the cowbirds' wings , and heard their grotesque singing . Cowbird Myra ! ! She's not going to get away with it . Cathy is tired , Lucy thought , watching them come slowly up the path . The child's thin legs were plodding . She trudged along slowly , both hands clutching a tired teddy bear . She was at the moment just a small , walking package , being delivered to her aunt's and uncle's house . Unlike Susan , she was traveling light ; ; the worn teddy bear , a tiny suitcase that Jim carried , and the clothes she wore , were all she had . Lucy glancing at the miniature case , knew there would not be enough in it for the shortest of stays ; ; they would have to buy things for her . She opened the door . Unimpressed , the dog plopped on the sand . Quint couldn't blame Maggie for disbelieving . For eleven days they'd done the same thing , leaving the cottage quietly before breakfast , before Esperanza Beach got jammed with tourists and beach balls and show-offy lifeguards . The swirling sand made Quint's limp more pronounced . They walked slowly past the sherbet-colored cottages -- eleven lemon , nine mint , seven orange -- around the curve to a deserted stand with an `` Eats '' sign jiggling in the wind . Now they were in friendly territory . Nobody around . Nothing but sand and a ridge of rocks sloping jaggedly to the water's edge . His rock was to the right of a V-shaped inlet , a big , brown , lumpy rock trailing seaweed whiskers . His rock was special because no one on the beach could see him here . Here he was enclosed and safe . ( If a dragon or a sea monster came along , didn't he have a red Swiss hunting knife on his belt -- ten blades and a corkscrew ? ? ) Here was a perfect place to lie down and make believe . He was Canute controlling the waves . He was a knight of the Round Table , `` Sir Quintus the Brave '' , slaying evil spirits and banshees and vampires and witches with warty noses . ( One good thing about a suit of armor , his leg wouldn't show . ) He was the first astronaut on the moon , chosen because of his small size and intrepid nature . He was six feet one like his father , with big hands and a hairy chest , a man the weak and persecuted would turn to . Fearless . Every night when he wanted a drink of water , didn't he practice being fearless by not turning on the bathroom light ? ? A dark bathroom can be pretty scary , and he'd creep back to bed , proud of himself , thinking : Tomorrow , for sure , I'll go down to the rock and keep my promise to Dad . He hadn't intended to make the promise . It happened two weeks ago , the night before his father left on a business trip to South America . Every piece of the nightmare was clear , in place ; ; and when he woke up , his father was saying , `` Stop screaming , Quint . It's all right . Stop shaking '' . He could remember the feel of his father's big hands , the thump of his father's heart sending out signals -- regular , like radar . `` Let's talk about the beach . Son . While I'm gone you get brown and fat as a pig , hear ? ? Look , I can put two fingers between the cords in the back of your neck . Dr. Fortman says swimming would help your leg . He says you're limping more than you need to '' . `` How does he know ? ? Big dumb nut . He never had polio '' . In the light from the bedside table his father looked so worried that the promise spilled out . `` You just wait , Dad . When you get back I'll probly be swimming better than Victoria . Wait and see , Dad '' . Victoria was fourteen months younger than Quint , a head taller , and could lick any boy or girl on the beach . He called her `` Fatso '' . She called him `` Stuck-up -- that's why nobody plays with you , Mister Stuck-up '' . Or , what was worse , she prayed for him out loud at bedtime : `` Please , Lord Gord , please give my brother the strength to go swimming like he promised '' . `` She's got a nerve '' . Quint said now to the clouds . Strength began to zip up and down his chest . He felt strong as a giant . He unlaced his high brown shoes and took off the metal brace on his leg . He wadded his sweat shirt into a ball and stripped down to his swimming trunks . `` Goolick , goooolick '' , creaked a sea gull . `` Aw , shut up '' , he said . He stood on the rock , a skinny , dignified boy surrounded by the ocean . The wind bored a hole between his shoulder blades , and when he looked at the choppy waves coming and going and crossing each other he could see his head down there , bleeding , wedged between the rocks and the waves . I can't go in . I'm scared of the nightmare . Shivering , he put on his clothes . And shivering with shame , he crawled to the narrow end of the rock and spat into the water . `` Watch it , big shot '' , a hoarse voice yelled back . She was holding on to his rock with one hand . She smelled of peppermints . She wore a bathing suit like his mother's , no straps on the shouders . `` Why didn't you duck '' ? ? He snapped . `` This is my rock '' . `` Isn't '' . `` Is '' . `` Isn't '' . `` Is '' . She was sore as a boil . `` Ever hear of squatter's rights '' ? ? `` Sure . They started with the Kansas-Nebraska Bill of eighteen '' -- `` Mister Big Britches , aren't you '' ? ? `` I'm Mark Gordon Peters the Fifth . They call me Quint '' . `` Then why don't you stop squinting '' ? ? `` I said Quint . That's short for Quintus . Quintus in Latin means '' -- `` I can speak both kinds of Latin , smart aleck '' . Her cough sounded like cloth ripping . `` You shouldn't smoke so much '' , he said , unconsciously imitating Victoria's holier-than-thou voice . `` I don't smoke '' . She was horrified . `` Do you '' ? ? `` Hell , yes '' . Not having said `` hell '' before , he stumbled a bit before gathering momentum . `` Sometimes eleven , fourteen a day '' . `` If I was your mama , I'd wop your tail off '' . `` My mother never wops me . I've got this leg brace '' . She seemed so unimpressed that he was obliged to roll up his blue jeans so she could see his brace . `` Dingy-looking '' , was what she said . `` Why don't you paint it red and white like a barber pole '' ? ? `` Because maybe I won't have to wear it always . Dr. Fortman says if I exercise my leg more , maybe I can use a cane when I'm big '' . She spouted a mouthful of water into the air . `` A cane's mighty handy . Someone's walking past , you want to stop him , zoooop , snag him around the neck with the crook in your cane . Or say a waiter brings you a bowl of soup with a dead fly in it -- all you got to do is bannnnnng , stooooomp your cane on the floor . Hey , will you look at that '' ? ? Maggie had shaken himself awake and was licking the sand off his stubby whiskers and his long plume of a tail . `` That's some dog . What kind '' ? ? `` Part collie , part wire-haired terrier '' . Quint glared . He always did when people asked . `` Holy mackerel , that's the most unique dog I ever saw '' , she said firmly . `` His real name's DiMaggio , only we call him Maggie because he has to take tranquilizers . He's braver than he looks . He's been sick lately . Last Tuesday he went on a ham jag '' . `` A what '' ? ? He would have told her , but Victoria was yodeling . That meant `` Mama wants you Quint . Come home or I'll come find you '' . `` I gotta go . Even though this is my rock , you can use it sometimes . I come early in the morning '' . `` So do I . See you around , Mister Squint '' . That was how they started being friends . They met next morning and all the mornings thereafter . Same time , early , before the fog burned off , because she didn't like the sun ; ; it made her blister . Her name was Sabella , and the strip of seaweed around her neck was an emerald necklace the King gave her as a token of his undying love . `` You going to marry the King '' ? ? `` No . He's got a long beard and picks his teeth with a fork . My hair is what he's nuts about . Naturally curly hair runs in my family . Personally , I prefer straight hair like yours , but as they say on the Continent , ' What can one do ' '' ? ? `` Which continent '' ? ? `` Name one , I been there '' . Japan , she said , smelled pugh because people let dead fish lie on the beaches till the fish got hard as rocks ; ; then they scraped off the mold and made fish soup . Pugh . Camels in Tripoli had harelips . Near Galway the tinkers drove their caravans down to the beach and sang and drank and fought all night . As for dancing -- holy mackerel , he ought to see the gypsies in Jerez ; ; they danced on the sand till your blood got hot and danced with them . `` Really '' . Quint smothered a yawn . She made better pictures than any book he'd read , but he didn't say so . Artfully , as the days went by , he found occasion to tell her that his father had won the Navy Cross in the Korean War ; ; that his baby sister could spit up through her nose when she felt like it ; ; that he personally had an IQ of 141 and was currently reading the Mushr to Ozon volume of the encyclopedia . `` Books are for schnooks '' . She skipped a piece of water at him and laughed , a funny , hoarse laugh he liked to hear . Nobody ever appreciated his jokes as much as Sabella . ( `` What did one tonsil say to the other tonsil ? ? Let's get dressed up -- the doctor's taking us out tonight '' . And `` What time did the Chinaman go to the dentist ? ? Tooth-hurty '' . ) Encouraged by her giggles he imitated Maggie who was crazy about ham . He described the ham decorated with pineapple and cherries , cooling on the porch . He snuck up on the ham like Maggie , gumming it with soft , stumpy teeth , then panting with thirst , lapping up the water in the lagoon , swelling up like a balloon , staggering home to be sick , while his mother said , `` That does it . That dog has to go '' . `` Say , you're quite a comic '' , Sabella said admiringly . `` Ever thought about going on the stage '' ? ? He hadn't . But it was such a nice thought that he nodded his head . `` Either that or a veterinarian '' . `` Better make up your mind , son '' , Sabella said . `` You can't serve cod and salmon '' . Sometimes they argued . She said sharks have no bones and shrimp swam backward . His encylopedia agreed with Sabella . Next morning he tied a bunch of sea daisies with string and threw them across the V-shaped inlet to the rock where she was swimming around . Boy , could she catch ! ! Like Willie Mays in the outfield . `` Nobody gave me flowers before . Thank you , Quint '' . Her face turned pink with pleasure and a smothered cough . `` You can always tell a real gentleman -- they got a certain je ne say quok '' . Sometimes they didn't talk at all . He daydreamed on the rock while she swam and splashed around . Once when she asked why he never went swimming and he answered , `` Don't feel like it '' , he was tempted to tell her about being scared . But Victoria began yodeling just then and he went home , carrying Sabella in the back of his head , not thinking about her , just knowing she was there , smiling , smelling of peppermints . As for his promise -- oh , he had plenty of time , buckets of time . Wednesday morning it happened . They were eating breakfast . `` We beseech thee , Lord Gord , to bless this food '' -- that was Victoria saying grace while the baby sprayed raisin toast on her plastic bib . Same old breakfast till the phone rang , making his mother's voice shake with excitement . `` Your Daddy's in San Francisco '' , she told them . `` He says he'll be here on the one-o'clock plane . Fifteen days early -- isn't that wonderful '' ? ? `` Yeah , keen '' . A cave seemed to be opening in Quint's stomach . `` Children , we'll have to get organized . The baby can have an early nap . Victoria , I want you to -- '' Quint closed the screen door quietly so Maggie wouldn't be scared . `` Hurry up , we're late '' , he said , noticing with a chill how gray the sky was this morning , the fog like a rope along the horizon , the choppy waves sending off sheets of blue and Kool-Aid green . The cave in his stomach hurt . He had to go into the water . He'd tell Sabella about the nightmare . It had started two years ago when he was in an iron lung . What caused it , he didn't know . The metal collar gagging his neck ? ? Sweating so much ? ? The unbearable weight on his chest ? ? All of it together meant drowning . The first time the nurse took him out of the lung , she said if he got frightened , she'd put him back for a second . When Bobbie Evans smashed up his car , the Jaguar his wife Linda had given him for his last birthday , and himself quite thoroughly with it , driving back from an afternoon's golf at Oakmont , it seemed to mark the end of a long , miswritten chapter in the social life of the community . Linda looked remote yet lovely in black , and everyone held his or her breath . Not that Linda was heartless , not that she would do anything prematurely or in bad taste any more than John Cooper would . Hadn't Linda been a perfect wife to Bobbie , who was the least bit of a disappointment all these years ? ? Wasn't John Cooper even more attractive at forty-seven than he had been twenty-five years earlier ? ? And wasn't John's wife , Edythe , even more appalling , if possible ? ? Didn't John Cooper , after all this time , deserve something better of life ? ? Wasn't it adult and realistic to look at it that way ? ? And romantic ? ? Everybody knew that John Cooper had married Edythe on the rebound . It was the kind of thing that could ruin a man's life , and it was a tribute to John's strength of character and very real business ability that it hadn't ruined his . `` Of course , there was nothing you could do , but you still ought to be ashamed of yourself for letting it happen '' , Mousie Chandler said to Linda Stuart . `` Poor John '' ! ! Linda accepted the reproach , which was something she did rarely in all her life and most rarely in that summer of 1936 when she was by all odds the prettiest and brightest young woman west of the Allegheny Mountains , and John was surely one of the handsomer and brighter young men around Pittsburgh . For it had been John and Linda ever since she had come out two seasons before at the Golf Club to the goggle-eyed admiration not only of the stag line but even of her fellow debs . John had claimed her from the stag line , a young man a year out of Dartmouth with skiing crinkles still around his eyes . You saw them always together those years . You talked about John-and-Linda as an entity . John-and-Linda were at Longue Vue last night ; ; John-and-Linda drove to Conneaut in three and a half hours . Then there was a spat over something , as there had been lovers' spats before ; ; only this one didn't heal . You still said `` John-and-Linda '' , but as if you were speaking of a national catastrophe such as the depression or Dillinger . It got worse instead of better . First , it came out after Mr. Cooper's will was settled -- he had died the year before -- that John and his mother weren't rich any more . And then there was Linda's engagement to Bobbie Evans . There was no connection between the two events , because Bobbie wasn't rich , either , though he was more aggressive than John . He was a bright and handsome young man from New York , who worked for the same steel company as John did . Some people said Linda had just announced the engagement to jolt John into some action , but when John came home from a business trip to Cleveland with Edythe , with Edythe his bride , it could no longer be John-and-Linda even to sentimental wishful thinkers . It wasn't even John and Edythe . It was simply Poor John . There was nothing specifically wrong with Edythe , but there was absolutely nothing right about her either . Mousie Chandler had been to school with her someplace near Baltimore and tried to explain rather than defend her to the gang having lunch at Horne's . `` Well , you shouldn't underestimate Edythe '' , Mousie said . `` I know she gives the impression of being shallow and frivolous and scatterbrained . She is frivolous and scatterbrained , but she really isn't shallow '' . Bobbie and Linda looked magnificent at their wedding . John was at the church with Edythe . She giggled during the ceremony , and Mousie Chandler , who was one of Linda's bridesmaids , said John glared black as death at her . `` As if he were choking '' , she said . `` Poor John '' ! ! Edythe settled down to become a social myth and a horrible example . Her hair never seemed to be in place and her skirts were never quite the correct length . She didn't have a bad shape when you caught her at the pool at Longue Vue , but her bathing suits were far from smart . And you didn't see her much at Longue Vue or anywhere , for John had drifted away from the gang . Mousie said it was because he was too proud to stand pity . Others thought he couldn't stand seeing Linda , Mrs. Bobbie Evans , still so beautiful , so much in command of everything . There were less-dramatic reasons too . John's mother died not long after his marriage , and there was even less Cooper money left . John sold the big old place in Sewickley and bought a smaller house in Fox Chapel . He was not reduced to poverty , but his job at the steel company had become a real job and not a method of passing the day . John was good at his job . It probably wasn't hard for him to keep his nose to the grindstone with nothing but Edythe to come home to . Though that may be unfair since Ben Cooper , John's first son , came along early in 1938 , the cutest baby you ever saw and a blessing that he looked all Cooper from fontanel to pink toes , nary a trace of Edythe . But the continuing charm of the other children -- Sally in 1940 and Jack in 1944 -- and all John's success at his work only made Edythe's dizziness and general uselessness more glaring . She never could fit into a crowd which had known , which still knew and admired Linda . When there was bridge at Edythe's house , the cards shuffled like wet graham crackers and the food probably was wet graham crackers . She managed a missionary drive for the church once and got the books so confused that old Mr. Webber , the eldest elder , who'd never donated more than five dollars to anything , had to cough up five hundred dollars to avoid a scandal in what Edythe called `` the bosoms of the church '' . John did find the missing checks and money afterward , and the drive was actually oversubscribed , which was a real bit of luck for the missionaries . Being an intelligent man , John must have guessed what everyone thought about Edythe , but he never let on by so much as a brave smile . Poor John was the kind of stock that keeps a bargain without whimpering and maybe bends over backward to keep a bad one . He was an attentive and generous husband , overgenerous , a lot of people felt , because they knew that money must be a problem to him . But he got ahead in business : on leave from his job to an important Washington assignment during the war ; ; after the war back to the heir apparency of the steel company . The Coopers saw Bobbie and Linda socially , but no more than was necessary . Bobbie had been successful , too , though he didn't match John's pace , and after all he didn't need to , with all the Stuart money . He and Linda settled down to being social leaders , and Linda managed to look a little more beautiful each year . And then came the hairpin turn , the smashed Jaguar and Linda , mourning alone and lovely . Everyone held his or her breath . `` Don't think Linda couldn't have got John back any time , if she'd tried '' , Mousie Gordon , who had been Mousie Chandler , said between bites of a chicken sandwich at a luncheon table at Le Mont . `` Now you know she could've , but she isn't that kind of girl . But now -- well , it would be a blessing , I think . Poor John '' . Linda Evans felt more wretched than she had ever dreamed Bobbie's death could move her to feeling . What she felt was a bone-deep loss with a sense of waste to it , not so much sorrow for handsome , ambitious Bobbie , but for the lost years that had been brought into high relief by his death . She knew what people were thinking ; ; it was what she had been thinking herself . It was up to her to save Poor John , dear John , to undo the wrong she had done , but she trembled at the decision as at the brink of a cold stream . There was no one who would blame her or John ; ; she could be sure of that . It might be rough on Edythe at first , but Linda and John between them could make a settlement handsome enough to soothe her , to send her back to Cleveland or anywhere . And Linda felt capable of capturing the affection of the children , anxious even , since she and Bobbie had had none of their own . It would be good for them to have a mother they need not be ashamed of . Linda would have to wait , she knew . But what was a decent six months or so after the more than twenty years gone by ? ? Years of watching while Poor John struggled without the help and understanding of the kind of wife a man needed to get ahead . Of course , he had done wonders . Alloy steels and regular steels had different sales departments at Smith & MacIsaacs , where John and Bobbie both worked . Bobbie had been head of the alloy division , while John was just another good salesman in the regular branch . So when old Mr. Lovejoy , the company president , talked about putting in a single sales manager for both branches after the head of the regular steels had gone with Carnegie-Illinois , it looked like the perfect chance for Bobbie . For Linda knew how to help her husband , not just the Stuart-family contacts but also the little dinners for Reuben Lovejoy . She was almost sick when Bobbie came home with the news that Poor John had won the job . `` What did you do '' ? ? She asked Bobbie . `` You must have done something , something wrong . Lord knows I had everything set for you '' . Bobbie said something about damned Pittsburghers sticking together , and Linda got angry at him . They had their first real fight , and Bobbie went off to get drunk . Linda dragooned her uncle , Donald Murkland , into a lunch the next day to find out what had happened . He was a director of S. & M. and must have been in on the decision . But jolly old Uncle Donald would tell her no more than that Bobbie had certainly been considered for the job , but there were factors in a large company which outsiders and even some insiders couldn't understand . He didn't tell her of the long board meeting where Bobbie and John were weighed one against the other . `` I'm behind John Cooper '' , Mr. Lovejoy said finally . `` I think we're agreed that he and Evans are equal in ability , so we have to look at the thing in terms of incentive . `` Now , I believe Poor John'll work just a little harder . With that wife of his , I think he feels every chance he gets is his big chance . Bobbie , with Linda behind him , will have plenty of other opportunities . And also , the money can't mean as much to Bobbie . `` Bobbie will take the job as his just reward and work hard at it ; ; Poor John will take it as a miracle and have every other independent steel company sitting up nights worrying about us '' . Most of the directors nodded . Uncle Donald Murkland found himself nodding agreement too . After the surprise was over , Linda was almost as pleased as anyone with John's good luck , though she agreed with Bobbie's decision some months later to move to Funk Furnaces . The job at Funk wasn't particularly better , but it got him away from being subordinate to John and assured him steady advancement , since Funk was owned to a large degree by various branches of Linda's family . Poor John's rise continued to be meteoric . When he was made a vice president only a year after the new sales job , a leading business magazine ran his photograph with a brief biography in a series on national business leaders of the future . She called then to say she had a baby-sitter for that night . `` Shirley appreciated the chance to make some money . Such a nice little thing -- lives right in the building '' . `` That's swell '' , I said sweetly . I could get along without that three dollars . In some ways it was worth being out the money -- just knowing I was no longer obligated to Nadine ! ! It was past midnight and we were in bed when the phone rang . I stumbled through the hall , wondering who would be calling at this hour . I answered to find Nadine at the other end . `` You scared me half to death '' , I said shakily . `` What's wrong '' ? ? `` Janice , nobody answers at the apartment '' ! ! Her voice came shrill . `` I'm absolutely frantic ! ! That stupid girl might have gone off and left Francie '' ! ! `` Oh , she wouldn't do that '' , I said . `` She's probably fallen asleep and doesn't hear the phone . But if you're worried you can go home and check '' -- `` I can't leave the party ! ! We're at Ken Thom's apartment , and when one couple leaves early everything falls flat ! ! Old Mr. Thom is already down on Wally , and we simply can't afford to get Ken mad at us '' -- I was all set for what came next . `` Janice , could you possibly go over and make sure everything's all right ? ? I'll call you there in ten minutes '' -- `` I can't make it in ten minutes '' -- Wondering , as I said it , why I should make it at all . Why should I go over at midnight to check on Francie , when her parents didn't care enough to leave a party ? ? `` Fifteen minutes , then ! ! Please , Janice . I'll be glad to pay you '' -- So sure that money could do anything ! ! `` All right '' , I said . I'd do it . Not for the dollar or so Nadine would give me . But because there was the chance that something had gone wrong at the apartment , and if I didn't go over , who would ? ? Chris was sound asleep , and I didn't see any sense in waking him . I dressed in the kitchen , then left a note on the table telling him what had happened . I drove off through the cool darkness to Nadine's apartment and rang the bell , and in a few seconds a young girl opened the door . Her face was flushed from sleep . `` It's all right '' , I said , as she started to look scared . `` Mrs. Roberts had called , and couldn't wake you . I just came over to make sure everything was all right '' . `` I'm -- hard to wake up '' , she faltered . She didn't look over thirteen . And Nadine insisted that her sitters be reliable ! ! `` I have to get up early for church tomorrow '' , she went on . `` I didn't know it was going to be this late '' ! ! The phone started ringing . `` That's Mrs. Roberts again '' , I said . `` I'll answer it '' . I crossed the beautifully furnished living room to the pale yellow phone . I told Nadine everything was fine , and that I'd be getting on home . `` Janice , would you mind staying '' ? ? There was a ragged edge to her voice now , as if she'd been crying . `` Wally's drunk -- I'll get him out of here as soon as I possibly can , but I don't want Shirley to see him like this . You know how gossip of that sort spreads through an apartment building '' -- Not a word of thanks for what I'd already done . The receiver clicked in my ear . She didn't even give me a chance to refuse . Well , there wasn't any law that said I had to stay ! ! But then I looked at Shirley and thought that I might as well -- the child needed her sleep , and Heaven knew what kind of a mess it would be , with Wally coming home drunk . So I told her Mrs. Roberts would pay her in the morning , and she scooted off to her own apartment . After I looked in at Francie , I went into the living room and waited . I must have dozed off , because I came to with a start at the sound of voices . Nadine's , shrill with anger -- Wally's loud and thick -- As I went to the door I heard the clock strike two . I opened the door , and Wally stumbled in -- fast -- as if Nadine had pushed him . I had always thought she was so beautiful . But now she looked ugly . Her skin was stretched so tight that her cheekbones stuck out , and if looks could kill , Wally would have been dead . `` Pack your clothes '' , she hissed . `` Pack -- and get out '' ! ! `` You're crazy '' , Wally said thickly . He lurched and stumbled to the davenport and sank down on it , and was instantly asleep . Nadine strode over to him , and her pointed nails raked across his face . I grabbed her arm and she turned on me and for a scared second I thought that maybe Wally was right , and she was crazy . `` You stay out of this '' , she spat at me . `` He's ruined us -- do you hear me -- he's ruined us ! ! He insulted Ken Thom '' ! ! Her eyes were wild . `` He told Ken to his face that he doesn't have what it takes to get a woman ! ! And the other people there were listening ! ! We're ruined and he's going to get out if I have to throw him down the stairs '' -- `` you'd better simmer down '' , I said nervously . I was plenty scared . In the state she was in , she could actually kill him ! ! `` Now you just take it easy , and I'll make you some tea '' -- `` Tea , '' Nadine screeched . `` How can you be so damn stupid ? ? Wally's lost his job ! ! Ken will never forgive him -- never ! ! And we don't have any money -- we don't have a dime ! ! All we own is Francie's bedroom set and the televison-record player and we even owe on them . And we'll be poor and have to live in a grubby little house like yours -- and all because of that '' -- I clamped my hand over her mouth to stop the stream of filth . `` Stop that ! ! You'll wake up the whole building . Wally can't go any place at this hour '' -- `` Well then , I'll get out '' -- But she looked uncertain . She was coming to her senses enough to realize that you don't go traipsing off anywhere at two in the morning . `` You go to bed '' , I said curtly . `` In the morning you and Wally can talk things out '' -- She collapsed against me , as if everything inside her snapped . I got her into bed , and sat with her until she had sobbed herself out . It was three o'clock before I figured it was all right to go . I left her , a limp bundle of self-pity , shivering with terror because her bubble had burst around her . Wally was snoring on the davenport . I had done all I could . I had done all I was going to do . Whether or not Wally lost his job was no concern of mine . I drove home , found Chris still asleep . I snuggled up close to him -- loving him -- thankful for a man like him . Thankful I wasn't Nadine . I kept on being thankful . In the afternoon Nadine and Wally came over with Francie . Wally sat in our big chair , his hands between his knees , looking ready to cry . `` I'd had all this trouble with the old man , that's why I drank so much . I -- got fired yesterday for not attending to business '' -- Old Mr. Thom himself had stopped at the service station for a grease job , Wally confessed , and couldn't get one because there were cars on the pits waiting to be repaired . Seems that the kid Wally had hired had a repair business of his own going on the side . Mr. Thom had gotten Wally on the phone , and fired him . `` I thought I'd smooth things over through Ken '' , Wally said miserably . `` But Ken got coy and wouldn't make any promises . And I was plastered and I blew my stack '' -- `` And told him right to his face he'd never slept with a woman '' ! ! I tried to quiet Nadine because the children were there . But she was beyond caring what she said . `` Things may smooth over yet '' , Chris said , his nice lean face grave with honest concern . But I couldn't help thinking that Nadine and Wally were getting just what they deserved . Now maybe they'd realize that life can be tough . When A bubble breaks , there's nothing . Little by little , during the week , Chris and I discovered the crazy unbelievable way Nadine and Wally had lived . They had not only spent every cent -- they were in debt up to their necks , owing on everything they owned . On top of everything else they were two months behind on their apartment rent , and the day Wally received written notice that he was fired , they were evicted . Worst of all , Wally had no training for any kind of work . He had fallen into a soft job , and now the job was gone and he was stranded . Chris fretted . `` I wish we were in a position to offer a little money to tide them over '' . I said I wished we were , too . It was easy enough to say it , because of course we couldn't spare a cent . But Chris brightened up like a candle . `` I'm glad you feel that way , honey . There is one big way we can help them . We can let them move in with us '' -- Something I had simply never thought of . Something so incredible -- I just stared at him . It was incredible -- He gave me an embarrassed , pleading look . `` I know we'd be pretty crowded . But it would only be for a couple of weeks -- until they get straightened out '' . Straightened out -- They'd had years of making all that money ! ! `` I won't do it '' , I said flatly . `` Nadine was always too good to live in a little house like this ! ! Well , now she can sleep in the street for all I care '' ! ! `` That isn't like you , Janice '' , Chris said uncomfortably . Then I felt uncomfortable , too . I didn't want to be like that , mean and bitter . But , darn it all , why should we help a couple of spoiled snobs who had looked down their noses at us ? ? But , in the end , we did . It just seemed as if there was nothing else to do . The finance company took all their furniture -- and they didn't have a cent to their name . Then Wally got sick . To my way of thinking , he was scared sick . His luck had failed him , and it was easier to crawl off into bed than to get out and fight the world . Chris made trip after trip in our old car , moving the clothes and dishes and the stock of groceries Nadine had bought on special . At least we'll eat , I thought grimly as I put all the food away . While I worked , Nadine sat and cried . When she wasn't crying , she was in our bedroom fighting with Wally . `` Virus infection nothing '' , she'd scream at him . `` You're too lazy to go out and look for another job . You're just a no-good bum '' ! ! It was a mess , all right . But it couldn't go on forever -- A couple of weeks , Chris had said . I figured I could stand practically anything for a couple of weeks . But the two weeks dragged into three , and they were still with us . Nadine's constant nagging had finally gotten Wally out of bed . He set out every morning looking for work , and come home around noon , full of alibis and excuses . Wendell Thom had black-balled him . Nobody would even take his application . `` You can get something , '' Nadine would snap . `` You can get a job working in a grocery store , if nothing else '' . `` The high school kids have got everything sewed up '' , he said , a whine in his voice . `` Those damn punks -- taking work away from men who need it '' . `` By fall they'll be back in school '' , I'd say , trying to sound encouraging . But this was only the middle of July . And I couldn't take six more weeks of this . I mentioned it to Chris one stifling hot night , when I had slipped outside for a breath of fresh air . I don't really believe in intuition . But I swear to you from the moment I opened my eyes , I knew it was going to be a bad day . Part of it was the weather , so foggy it would take me twice as long to get to the hospital . Part of it was being so tired -- I'd not only had my usual full day yesterday , but a dinner meeting as well , that kept me up late . But the rest of it , the main part , wasn't based on logic at all . It was just going to be one of those days . For the thousandth time , I wished I'd chosen some nice , nine-to-five , five-days-a-week profession . And for the thousandth time , I answered myself . I hadn't chosen medicine -- it had chosen me . Actually , I shouldn't complain , I told myself in the shaving mirror . I had a lot to be thankful for . A profession that brought me as good an income as mine wasn't to be sneezed at . Maybe I didn't see as much of Gladdy as I'd like , but how much worse it would have been if I'd had to board her out somewhere after Alice went -- send my daughter to an orphanage or a boarding-home . At least , we were together and we had Mrs. Hodges , bless her , to look after us -- no mother could be fonder of Gladdy than Mrs. Hodges was . I was lucky in lots of ways , no doubt about it . Especially in the way Gladdy had turned out . Growing up without a mother from the time she was three -- it wasn't a good thing for a child , even knowing the kind of mother Alice had been . But I mustn't start on Alice . She is a closed book , a picture I keep on my bureau , but never look at . If she'd kept on as she'd been going , the story I'd told Gladdy would probably have been true by now , anyhow As usual , Gladdy's bright smile greeted me at the breakfast table . Her first class wasn't until ten , but she always got up to have breakfast with me . It made me feel good and knowing that she'd decided , all on her own , to go to college right here in town made me feel good , too . Oh , I knew that I couldn't give myself all the credit for her decision . I had a feeling that young Pete Michelson , the most promising intern at Fairview , had something to do with it , too . She'd been out with Pete the night before and her gay chatter about their date lightened my mood a little . But once I was alone again , driving to the hospital , the heaviness returned . If she and Pete were really getting serious , I'd have to do some hard thinking . Should I tell him the truth about Alice ? ? Did he have a right to know the secret I'd kept from Gladdy all these years ? ? The boys were already waiting in the corridor outside my office when I got to Fairview . Two interns and Dick Ishii , the other resident . I'm Chief of Medicine here and this morning would start like all others , with me taking the boys on the rounds . Pete was down on Seven , Dick told me , and he'd meet us there . There wasn't anything of special interest that morning , no one sicker than they should have been . Pete came to meet us when we stepped out of the elevator on Seven -- he'd had a case of post-operative shock , but it was all taken care of now . Seven is a women's floor and , as it happened , not very busy right then . When we'd finished our regular rounds , Pete pointed me toward the small ward at the end of the floor . `` Got a new one in last night '' , he said . `` I haven't seen her yet , but I hear she's a lulu '' ! ! I wasn't surprised . The ward was a small one , four beds , kept reserved for female alcoholics . We didn't get many at Fairview and they were never pretty sights . It was thought wiser to keep them segregated from the patients in the regular charity ward . The moment I walked in , the whole miserable feeling of the day seemed to focus on the woman in the bed . They'd cleaned her up some , of course , and she'd pretty much slept off her drunk . But there was something about her -- and I felt my lips forming a name . Alice But this woman's name was Rose Bancroft ! ! I looked at the chart for reassurance . Yes , Rose Bancroft , diagnosis : acute alcoholism . She looked about sixty , though I recalled that the chart gave her age as forty-four . An ugly scar disfigured the somewhat familiar puffy face , already marred by the tell-tale network of broken red veins that heavy drinkers carry . Her coarse hair was two-colored -- bleached blonde and its real , dirty gray . Oh , could it be ? ? No , no it was an unfortunate resemblance , that was all it was , and I turned to Dick , forcing myself to put my disquiet out of my mind . In a low voice , Dick filled us in she'd been picked up downtown , passed out in the doorway . Although quiet when they brought her in , she'd suddenly turned violent and had to be knocked out . It was the old story . We'd keep her a day or two , and the AA people would talk to her . But if she wasn't interested , she'd just go back to the same life she'd left . Turning toward the patient again , I -- I can't describe what happened to me then , except to say that I felt sick . I tell you , it took every ounce of control I had to be able to speak . `` Now , Miss -- or is it Mrs. Bancroft '' ? ? I never liked going straight into an examination with patients -- it relaxes them , I've always thought , to chat first . This was one time I'd have gladly broken my own rule , but habit was too strong . `` Hey '' ! ! Her voice was flat and dull . But those penetrating eyes -- I had to turn my head away . It was then that I saw what the drawn-back covers revealed . There were bloodspots on the sheet . `` What's this '' ? ? I asked . `` Your period '' ? ? She shook her head . `` I been spotting a little now and then '' , she said quietly , no emotion in her voice . `` Have you spoken to a doctor about it '' ? ? Once again , there was a negative shake . I told Miss Groggins to move her down the hall where we had an examining table . `` Better do a Papanicolaou '' , I told Pete . It was only a few moments before Miss Groggins had her in the proper position for a vaginal , but I couldn't see anything wrong on gross examination . Pete stood by with a slide and took the smear , sent it down to the lab with a request for the test . That done , I told Miss Groggins to take her patient back to bed and again put her out of my mind . I was busy the rest of the day . Late in the afternoon , I was up on Seven again . One of my private patients was being admitted and I went in to see her settled . On my way to the elevator , I ran into Pete . `` I've got the results on the Bancroft smear test '' , he said . `` There's something there , all right . Class Three , they said . Do you want to talk to her , Doctor '' ? ? `` Well '' -- I didn't -- I didn't ever want to see that woman again . But that was ridiculous , of course . `` All right . We'll do a D. and C. and get her permission for a hysterectomy . Maybe it's nothing , maybe it's intraepithelial or in situ -- can't take any chances '' . `` If you can keep her here that long '' , Pete said wryly . `` Groggins tells me she's started badgering already , wants to get out . Wants to get to her booze , I guess '' . I grimaced in distaste . `` Well , better see what I can do '' . We'd been standing right outside Miss Bancroft's door and as I went to turn the knob to enter , I was surprised to find that the door was slightly ajar . But she seemed to be dozing and in any case , we'd been talking in low tones . Her eyes opened as soon as she heard me , though , and once again , I felt an inward shiver . `` I sure can't complain about the service in this place '' , she said . `` I just got through seeing one of you guys . What do you want '' ? ? There was something almost insulting in her tone , but I disregarded it . `` I've just been talking to Dr. Michelson '' , I said . `` We'd like you to have a dilatation and curettage . That's quite minor , nothing to worry about . But we would like your permission to do -- that is , to go further if it proves necessary '' . `` No '' . It was flat , definite . `` Suppose you let me explain . Actually , I rather doubt that we'll have to do this . Even if we do , you'll be out of here in a week , probably '' . I was sure that was the difficulty -- she just didn't want to stay here , where she couldn't get to the liquor . `` No '' . I looked at her in amazement . I'd had patients who'd refused surgery before , of course , but never one who didn't show , in one way or another , the reason why . Mostly , it was fear , but this woman's voice didn't tremble and her hands were still on the coverlet . `` Will you tell me why '' ? ? I asked . She smiled , a smile without humor . `` You shouldn't tell your little secrets outside of the patient's door '' , she said . `` I've got cancer , haven't I '' ? ? She went on , disregarding my protests . `` I'm not going to be one of your guinea pigs . Let your pupils learn on someone else , Doctor . Just let me die in peace '' . I stared at her , almost speechless . Her little speech was totally out of character with the sort of person I thought she was . Even her voice had taken on a more cultivated tone . This was someone who'd come down in the world , I thought . A long , long way down . Again there was something familiar about her , something -- `` You haven't got cancer '' , I said as strongly as I could . `` I don't know what you heard that would make you think so , but I assure you I don't even know myself , so how can you be so sure ? ? And even if '' -- `` Don't give me a lot of talk , Joe '' . I gaped at her . She could have found out my first name , of course -- that wouldn't be difficult . But there was that something , some echo in the way she spoke . She was watching me intently , a funny little half-smile on her lips . `` Surprised , baby ? ? Guess I've changed , haven't I ? ? But you haven't changed much , Joe '' . I knew then , knew with a heart-stopping shock . `` Alice '' -- I stammered through dry lips . `` Alice , for goodness sake '' -- `` Alice '' , she echoed mockingly . `` What's the matter , Joe , you scared of me ? ? Think I'm going to make you introduce a drunk as your wife ? ? Well , don't worry . Just let me outta here '' -- `` But why did you come back '' ? ? I'd found my voice . `` Where have you been all these years '' ? ? She shrugged . `` Here and there . As for coming back here -- well , I'll tell you the truth , I didn't even know where I was when I came to . The last thing I remember is a bar in San Diego '' -- The way she spoke , her flat acceptance of her alcoholic blackout , made me shudder . And this was Gladdy's mother ! ! `` I never asked you for any favors , Joe '' , she went on , `` but I'm asking one now . Let me outta here ! ! You doctors are all alike -- all you want is to cut up people and what's the good ? ? No , I want out , Joe '' ! ! I looked at the pathetic wreck of a woman before me . Let her out , let her out -- that would be the solution , wouldn't it ? ? What she'd said was true -- in all these years , she'd never asked for anything from me . If I let her go , she'd disappear once more . And Gladdy would be safe ! ! I was slowly swimming down to the bottom of the sea . She made me welcome . Her dark cool caresses were sweeter than any woman's ; ; the many little tricks she knew made her embrace the ultimate one -- the ever more fantastic pressures deeper in her body squeezed not me but the air I breathed into a nitrogen anesthetic . yielding-Mediterranian-woman- , she soothed me , and drew me deeper into her . I no longer knew how deep I was , somewhere under 230 feet , getting drunker , happier and more contented by the second . The reasons for this dive seemed foolish now . Only the dive itself had any meaning . The metal-tasting nitrogen made me wonder if I should remove the mouthpiece and suck in the sweet water . Perhaps if I took off the aqua-lung I could swim better , love my woman better . I chuckled aloud , and the mouthpiece fell out . While a hazy part of my mind concentrated on swimming down , a clear part sorted over recent events , among them my only positive act in a long time . It was when I packed up what duds I had and went to Paris . It was no vacation , just me getting out after a bellyfull . I knew it wouldn't be the same . Wild kicks never are , but I hoped to dig up a better frame of mind . Once before I had been to Paris , long before I married Valery . That first time was good and it stuck with me . I was twenty-one back then , in the army , and fog put our plane down at Orly instead of Rhine-Main . It was a Saturday evening in April with a mist-like rain , and I was a little high on the good taste of life . I had a pocketful of money , which was unusual when I was in the army , and the plane would be grounded all night . In less than an hour I had gotten a hotel , showered , shaved and was out on the Champs Elysees in a fresh uniform . I felt like a Hun in Rome . All the women were beautiful , and the men were equal to them ; ; everything was glamorous to my dazzled eyes . There were some sweet machines other than women : an old Bugatti , a lean Farina coachwork on an American chassis , a Swallow , a type A40-AjK Mercedes and lots more . There was the Arc de Triomphe and the Tour d'Eiffel -- I was no yokel , but I was young , and this was Paris ! ! I had champagne at Maxim's , then went into a cafe called the Jour et Nuit to ask the way to Montmartre . I never got there . I met Claire , which was better . She was eating bread and cheese just as fast as she possibly could , and washing it down with red wine . I stared . I didn't know a human could feed so fast and still be beautiful . She was blonde , and young , and nice and round in a tight white dress . Maybe her ravenous eating wasn't grotesque because she was so positive about it . When she had drained the last of the bottle and paid her bill , she came directly to my table and said : `` Handsome soldier , I have assuaged one hunger with food . I feel another of terrible urgency . Is your evening free '' ? ? `` Madame '' , I said with noblesse oblige because of the `` handsome '' -- `` yeah '' . And so off we went to her apartment . She was a nymphomaniac , of course , the poor girl . Toward the break of day I waxed philosophical , and drew analogies about her way of eating bread and cheese . Now it was nine years later , and it wasn't spring but winter when I returned . I got there on a Saturday evening . I made the mistake of going to the Jour et Nuit . The place was busy but I didn't feel like a Hun . I sat waiting for Life to come along and sweep me up . I had part of a bottle of French beer called Panther Pils ( so help me ) , then switched to Tuborg . After a few hours , Life hadn't showed , and I was crocked . I went to my hotel and slept . The next morning a little cognac made me feel better -- but what can you do in Paris on Sunday morning ? ? So I drank more cognac . All that day and Monday I drank just enough to orbit but not make deep space . I read the Tropic of Capricorn and the Tropic of Cancer . Elemental , but sex . That's what was on my mind . I was turning over the idea of a good debauchery when I dozed off . I felt better Tuesday evening when I woke up . My head was clear , my thinking sober and I was reconciled to this Paris idea as a flop on top of all my others . A good binge has that kind of therapeutic value . Sometime earlier the weather had turned cold and it was snowing . I went out into it . I walked around breathing the cold wine of the air until I found a park , and I sat down on a snowy bench where the light was dim and came from the sky . There was dignity and beauty in the little white flakes falling through the blue night . I had on only a topcoat , but I wasn't cold . I was just miserable . Pretty soon a woman came along carrying a folded umbrella as a walking stick . She saw me and sat down beside me , three feet away . Suddenly I understood why she had the umbrella . It gave her poise and posture . Without it she would have been drab and limp . It gave her propriety . It gave her the right to sit down beside me , back straight , one hand out on the handle . I couldn't imagine her without it . I knew all about her . She was another human being and happened to be a hustler . I didn't much care if she were there or not . After a while she said with sort of an unuttered laugh , `` You have snow in your hair and ears '' . ( I didn't have on a hat . ) Hardly glancing at her , I smiled a bleak one which said , Thanks , baby , but I'd rather be alone . She was silent for a while , then said , `` Why are you so unhappy '' ? ? `` I'm not unhappy '' , I lied , staring at the snow . She was trying to make a hole in my armor , and I didn't want it . `` Is it a woman '' ? ? She asked gently . She must have seen the ring on my left hand . `` Well -- women and unhappiness go together '' , I observed profoundly , adding , `` You can wager your derriere on that '' . `` Ah , Monsieur , it is not my business to wager it . '' This took me so funny I had to look at her . I felt my frozen sad face crumble , and I grinned a silly one I couldn't have helped . I even snorted a chuckle . She smiled at me , but it was an awfully sad smile . She was even more miserable than me . Her eyes were smiling , too , but so sadly , and there was tiredness and infinite wisdom in them . `` Now isn't it better to smile '' ? ? She asked . Because I liked this sad person so much , I said , `` Will you have a drink with me '' ? ? I could see the ancient cynicism reinforce itself in her eyes , and I wondered how many men she had picked up with this same gambit . Anyway , I pulled a bottle of Remy Martin out of my topcoat , drew the cork , and passed it to her . I could see she was shocked . `` I'm sorry I haven't got a glass '' , I said . `` Non , non '' , she said , taking the bottle , `` not for that be sorry '' . She tilted up and drank , and then I drank . It's really rotten to drink good cognac like that , but I hadn't cared before . I wasn't going to lug around a glass . There wasn't much light in the blue dark , but I could see her well . No child , this tart , she must have been thirty-five or even forty . I couldn't be sure . Somehow she was attractive . Not good looking , but self-confident and wise so that it made her attractive . I liked her , and all at once I was glad she was there . We finished the bottle -- I hadn't had a lot out of it earlier -- not speaking much to each other , and we stayed sober . I suppose we were cold , but we didn't feel it . We seemed to be drowsing , sadly , soberly , in the cold , cold air while the snow fell . Then she said , `` Allons '' , and we got up and went to my hotel without another word . I sensed no stranger in her . We undressed and made love with the comfortable acceptance I had once known with Valery . I decided thirty-five was the best estimate of her age . She had a funny little scar on her stomach , on the left side . I think we were very tired , for we awoke at the same moment , deeply rested , surprised to see the late morning sun on the windows , which were wet where the rime had melted . I felt wonderful , the absolute opposite of last night's melancholy . My head was clear . I was hungry as a wolf , and my body felt lean and vital . `` Bon jour '' , I said brightly , sitting up , which pulled the covers to her hips . She looked good , with her short tousled hair and no make-up . Maybe closer to thirty , I thought . `` Bon jour '' ! ! She exclaimed , smiling . `` J'ai faim '' ! ! `` Yeah , but breakfast first '' . With a laugh she beat me to the bathroom . I called downstairs for food and a toothbrush for her . She came out pink from a hot bath , and I gave her my robe . I had brushed my teeth , showered , shaved and dressed by the time a waiter wheeled in breakfast . `` The toothbrush Monsieur '' , he said , presenting it . I gave it to the woman . `` What is this for '' ? ? She asked innocently . `` Why , to brush your teeth '' . `` But I already have ! ! I used yours '' . `` Oh '' ? ? I said with round eyes . I wondered if I ought to go use the new one myself . But I smelled the coffee , and thinking , What the hell , live dangerously , I decided I would scald my worries away . The coffee wasn't very hot though , made in a filter pot , but it was good . We sent the waiter away and ate a tremendous amount of cold ham , hot hard-boiled eggs and hot garlic bread . As we ate , we talked . Her name was Suzanne , and mine Stephen . We sat back comfortably on the bed with our last cups of coffee . `` You are very tactful , do you know , Stephen '' , she remarked . `` Um '' ? ? I grunted , sipping . `` Yes , because you didn't run off to use that new toothbrush '' . I raised my eyes to look at her in the mirror . `` I didn't really use yours '' , she went on . `` I carry one in my purse . I know men never kiss les putains '' . To my immense relief , she changed the subject in the next sentence : `` Shall we go to the Louvre today '' ? ? `` All right '' . I said with enthusiasm at the idea . `` But not immediately '' . I put aside my empty cup . She smiled all the way to her wise , sad eyes , and drained her own . We were not rushed . `` What is this from '' ? ? I asked , touching the scar on her stomach . It was like a long thin line drawn through a pink circle . `` A bullet '' , she answered . The cynicism was back in her eyes , a bitter wisdom , and I wondered if forty were not so far wrong after all . She understood sex anyway , and played at it well . We went to the Louvre for a few hours , then by Metro to a cabaret in Montmartre . It was a nice place , not filled with smoke . We had champagne and steamed mussels . The sommelier brought the wine first , a magnum instead of the bottle I had ordered . He must have thought I was a tourist . I fixed him with a steely eye and said , `` What's this for ? ? I didn't ask for a Jeroboam of champagne '' . I thought that was pretty humorous , but I didn't laugh . Two letters had arrived for Miss Theresa Stubblefield : she put them in her bag . She would not stop to read them in American Express , as many were doing , sitting on benches or leaning against the walls , but pushed her way out into the street . This was her first day in Rome and it was June . An enormous sky of the most delicate blue arched overhead . In her mind's eye -- her imagination responding fully , almost exhaustingly , to these shores' peculiar powers of stimulation -- she saw the city as from above , telescoped on its great bare plains that the ruins marked , aqueducts and tombs , here a cypress , there a pine , and all around the low blue hills . Pictures in old Latin books returned to her : the Appian Way Today , the Colosseum , the Arch of Constantine . She would see them , looking just as they had in the books , and this would make up a part of her delight . Moreover , nursing various Stubblefields -- her aunt , then her mother , then her father -- through their lengthy illnesses ( everybody could tell you the Stubblefields were always sick ) , Theresa had had a chance to read quite a lot . England , France , Germany , Switzerland , and Italy had all been rendered for her time and again , and between the prescribed hours of pills and tonics , she had conceived a dreamy passion by lamplight , to see all these places with her own eyes . The very night after her father's funeral she had thought , though never admitted to a soul : Now I can go . There's nothing to stop me now . So here it was , here was Italy , anyway , and terribly noisy . In the street the traffic was really frightening . Cars , taxis , buses , and motorscooters all went plunging at once down the narrow length of it or swerving perilously around a fountain . Shoals of tourists went by her in national groups -- English school girls in blue uniforms , German boys with cameras attached , smartly dressed Americans looking in shop windows . Glad to be alone , Theresa climbed the splendid outdoor staircase that opened to her left . The Spanish Steps . Something special was going on here just now -- the annual display of azalea plants . She had heard about it the night before at her hotel . It was not yet complete : workmen were unloading the potted plants from a truck and placing them in banked rows on the steps above . The azaleas were as large as shrubs , and their myriad blooms , many still tight in the bud , ranged in color from purple through fuchsia and rose to the palest pink , along with many white ones too . Marvelous , thought Theresa , climbing in her portly , well-bred way , for she was someone who had learned that if you only move slowly enough you have time to notice everything . In Rome , all over Europe , she intended to move very slowly indeed . Halfway up the staircase she stopped and sat down . Other people were doing it , too , sitting all along the wide banisters and leaning over the parapets above , watching the azaleas mass , or just enjoying the sun . Theresa sat with her letters in her lap , breathing Mediterranean air . The sun warmed her , as it seemed to be warming everything , perhaps even the underside of stones or the chill insides of churches . She loosened her tweed jacket and smoked a cigarette . Content excited ; ; how could you be both at once ? ? Strange , but she was . Presently , she picked up the first of the letters . A few moments later her hands were trembling and her brow had contracted with anxiety and dismay . Of course , one of them would have to go and do this ! ! Poor Cousin Elec , she thought , tears rising to sting in the sun , but why couldn't he have arranged to live through the summer ? ? And how on earth did I ever get this letter anyway ? ? She had reason indeed to wonder how the letter had managed to find her . Her Cousin Emma Carraway had written it , in her loose high old lady's script -- t's carefully crossed , but l's inclined to wobble like an old car on the downward slope . Cousin Emma had simply put Miss Theresa Stubblefield , Rome , Italy , on the envelope , had walked up to the post office in Tuxapoka , Alabama , and mailed it with as much confidence as if it had been a birthday card to her next-door neighbor . No return address whatsoever . Somebody had scrawled American Express , Piazza di Spagna ? ? , across the envelope , and now Theresa had it , all as easily as if she had been the President of the Republic or the Pope . Inside were all the things they thought she ought to know concerning the last illness , death , and burial of Cousin Alexander Carraway . Cousin Emma and Cousin Elec , brother and sister -- unmarried , devoted , aging -- had lived next door to the Stubblefields in Tuxapoka from time immemorial until the Stubblefields had moved to Montgomery fifteen years ago . Two days before he was taken sick , Cousin Elec was out worrying about what too much rain might do to his sweetpeas , and Cousin Elec had always preserved in the top drawer of his secretary a mother-of-pearl paper knife which Theresa had coveted as a child and which he had promised she could have when he died . I'm supposed to care as much now as then , as much here as there , she realized , with a sigh . This letter would have got to me if she hadn't even put Rome , Italy , on it . She refolded the letter , replaced it in its envelope , and turned with relief to one from her brother George . But alas George , when he had written , had only just returned from going to Tuxapoka to Cousin Elec's funeral . He was full of heavy family reminiscence . All the fine old stock was dying out , look at the world today . His own children had suffered from the weakening of those values which he and Theresa had always taken for granted , and as for his grandchildren ( he had one so far , still in diapers ) , he shuddered to think that the true meaning of character might never dawn on them at all . A life of gentility and principle such as Cousin Elec had lived had to be known at first hand . Poor George ! ! The only boy , the family darling . Together with her mother , both of them tense with worry lest things should somehow go wrong . Theresa had seen him through the right college , into the right fraternity , and though pursued by various girls and various mammas of girls , safely married to the right sort , however much in the early years of that match his wife , Anne , had not seemed to understand poor George . Could it just be , Theresa wondered , that Anne had understood only too well , and that George all along was extraordinary only in the degree to which he was dull ? ? As for Cousin Alexander Carraway , the only thing Theresa could remember at the moment about him ( except his paper knife ) was that he had had exceptionally long hands and feet and one night about one o'clock in the morning the whole Stubblefield family had been aroused to go next door at Cousin Emma's call -- first Papa , then Mother , then Theresa and George . There they all did their uttermost to help Cousin Elec get a cramp out of his foot . He had hobbled downstairs into the parlor , in his agony , and was sitting , wrapped in his bathrobe , on a footstool . He held his long clenched foot in both hands , and this and his contorted face -- he was trying heroically not to cry out -- made him look like a large skinny old monkey . They all surrounded him , the family circle , Theresa and George as solemn as if they were watching the cat have kittens , and Cousin Emma running back and forth with a kettle of hot water which she poured steaming into a white enamelled pan . `` Can you think of anything to do '' ? ? She kept repeating . `` I hate to call the doctor but if this keeps up I'll just have to ! ! Can you think of anything to do '' ? ? `` You might treat it like the hiccups '' , said Papa . `` Drop a cold key down his back '' . `` I just hope this happens to you someday '' , said Cousin Elec , who was not at his best . `` Poor Cousin Elec '' , George said . He was younger than Theresa : she remembered looking down and seeing his great round eyes , while at the same time she was dimly aware that her mother and father were not unamused . `` Poor Cousin Elec '' . Now , here they both were , still the same , George full of round-eyed woe , and Cousin Emma in despair . Theresa shifted to a new page . `` Of course ( George's letter continued ) , there are practical problems to be considered . Cousin Emma is alone in that big old house and won't hear to parting from it . Robbie and Beryl tried their best to persuade her to come and stay with them , and Anne and I have told her she's more than welcome here , but I think she feels that she might be an imposition , especially as long as our Rosie is still in high school . The other possibility is to make arrangements for her to let out one or two of the rooms to some teacher of good family or one of those solitary old ladies that Tuxapoka is populated with -- Miss Edna Whittaker , for example . But there is more in this than meets the eye . A new bathroom would certainly have to be put in . The wallpaper in the back bedroom is literally crumbling off . '' ( Theresa skipped a page of details about the house . ) `` I hope if you have any ideas along these lines you will write me about them . I may settle on some makeshift arrangements for the summer and wait until you return in the fall so we can work out together the best . '' I really shouldn't have smoked a cigarette so early in the day , thought Theresa , it always makes me sick . I'll start sneezing in a minute , sitting on these cold steps . She got up , standing uncertainly for a moment , then moving aside to let go past her , talking , a group of young men . They wore shoes with pointed toes , odd to American eyes , and narrow trousers , and their hair looked unnaturally black and slick . Yet here they were obviously thought to be handsome , and felt themselves to be so . Just then a man approached her with a tray of cheap cameos , Parker fountain pens , rosaries , papal portraits . `` No '' , said Theresa . `` No , no '' ! ! She said . The man did not wish to leave . He knew how to spread himself against the borders of the space that had to separate them . Carrozza rides in the park , the Colosseum by moonlight , he specialized . Theresa turned away to escape , and climbed to a higher landing where the steps divided in two . There she walked to the far left and leaned on a vacant section of banister , while the vendor picked himself another well-dressed American lady , carrying a camera and a handsome alligator bag , ascending the steps alone . Was he ever successful , Theresa wondered . The lady with the alligator bag registered interest , doubt , then indignation ; ; at last , alarm . She cast about as though looking for a policeman : this really shouldn't be allowed ! ! Finally , she scurried away up the steps . Theresa Stubblefield , still holding the family letters in one hand , realized that her whole trip to Europe was viewed in family circles as an interlude between Cousin Elec's death and `` doing something '' about Cousin Emma . They were even , Anne and George , probably thinking themselves very considerate in not hinting that she really should cut out `` one or two countries '' and come home in August to get Cousin Emma's house ready before the teachers came to Tuxapoka in September . Of course , it wasn't Anne and George's fault that one family crisis seemed to follow another , and weren't they always emphasizing that they really didn't know what they would do without Theresa ? ? The trouble is , Theresa thought , that while everything that happens there is supposed to matter supremely , nothing here is supposed even to exist . They would not care if all of Europe were to sink into the ocean tomorrow . It never registered with them that I had time to read all of Balzac , Dickens , and Stendhal while Papa was dying , not to mention everything in the city library after Mother's operation . It would have been exactly the same to them if I had read through all twenty-six volumes of Elsie Dinsmore . She arranged the letters carefully , one on top of the other . Then , with a motion so suddenly violent that she amazed herself , she tore them in two . `` Signora '' ? ? She became aware that two Italian workmen , carrying a large azalea pot , were standing before her and wanted her to move so that they could begin arranging a new row of the display . `` Mi diapiace , Signora , ma insomma . '' `` Oh put it there '' ! ! She indicated a spot a little distance away . I knew it as surely as everybody in Westfield -- that Lucille was a husband stealer . You can't keep that kind of information quiet in a town of only 4000-plus . And I've been told that just about every town , no matter what its size , has its Lucille Warren . Just as it has its Susan Dolan , though nobody'd ever bothered to tell me that . Susan Dolan , that's me . They even talked about Lucille down at the Young Christians' League where I spent a lot of time in Bible classes and helping out with the office work for our foreign mission . I never heard my folks talk about her , though . They were good-living religious people , and I can truthfully say I never heard them spread any gossip about anybody . Even if they ever did say anything about people like Lucille Warren , I know they wouldn't have dreamed of saying it in front of me . My folks and my faith protected me from things like that . And so I was really upset the first time I discovered that my boy friend Johnnie was seeing Mrs. Warren . I asked him about it one night while we were sitting in his truck . I asked him if it was true . He gave me a straight , honest answer . `` Look , Sue baby '' , he'd said . Much as I love you -- well , a guy's a guy and Lucille's willing to -- to come across . Honest , kitten , that's all it is -- I don't even like Lucille much '' . I guess it was at that moment that I realized what I was up against in the person of Lucille Warren . But it didn't seem fair . My love for Johnnie was young and clean -- how could I possibly compete with a woman like that , who didn't hesitate to use her sex . Johnnie was a trucker with a small lumber outfit in a town about twenty miles away , and he was also pretty good at anything in the carpentry line . It was a vivid , sharp February morning that Johnnie first made his appearance in my back yard , bringing some stuff Dad had ordered . I wasn't in the habit of batting my eyes at delivery men , but the moment I saw Johnnie , I knew he was different . He wasn't only different -- he was it . He had an easy masculine grace about him , the kind that kids don't have , but that I had sometimes admired in other older men . His smile was quick , and his eyes held some promised secret that made my knees go limp . The most unbelievable thing about the chance meeting was that he seemed interested in me , too . I could hardly believe such good luck was mine . And now Lucille Warren had gotten a look at him . I guess she was between affairs or something , but anyway , she had set her sights on Johnnie , my Johnnie . I didn't like it one bit . But what could I do ? ? A man had to have his release -- at least that's what the boys used to say in high school -- and I wasn't providing it for Johnnie . Neither was his wife . She wouldn't have , even if he'd asked her . But he wouldn't ask her -- he wasn't the kind of man who would force his wife to submit to him against her will . And he wouldn't leave her either -- he'd told me that . He was too honorable to leave his wife penniless and leave those helpless children without their daddy . Johnnie loved me and wanted me . But the only love I was giving him was the pure kind . It was weeks before we even kissed for the first time . Against my folks' wishes , we'd been seeing each other for short rides in the truck . The rides were tame enough -- mostly we talked . But by the time the first crackling of spring came around , we both knew we were hopelessly in love . Yet even then we did nothing much but talk , and maybe neck a little . `` It's so crazy '' , I told him once . `` I always imagined I would probably end up marrying a minister or somebody like that . Somebody with no vices . You know '' . `` And you fall for a lumber jockey '' . `` Who drinks far too much '' . `` And smokes too much '' . `` And '' , I was ticking off the items on my fingers , `` swears too much and goes out with the boys , whoever they are , too much , and who ever goes to church and won't even listen when I try to persuade him to come back to the fold '' . He examined his nails carefully . `` I could walk out the door '' . `` Don't you dare '' . `` And never show my face or my truck around here again '' . He still wasn't looking at me . `` You wouldn't '' . `` Or I could visit Lucille Warren '' . `` You wouldn't . Please ! ! You wouldn't '' . He shrugged noncommittally . `` I might '' . And now he was seeing her . He'd just admitted it to me . I huddled miserably beside him in the truck . It was all my doing -- his seeing her . Johnnie and I had been innocent in our love , and that was the way I wanted to keep it . At first , Johnnie hadn't understood -- how could he , not being a religious person like me ? ? But then he had said , `` All right , kid , if that's how you want it , that's how it'll be '' . But what had I done , trying to keep us pure ? ? I had driven him into the arms of that scheming woman . I had just the same as delivered him into the hands of the Devil ! ! So one week later , I surrendered to him in the little motel on Route 10 . My very first time . I was desperate to hold him , to give him whatever in this world he wanted or needed , and to keep him from the clutches of Lucille Warren . And , though at the time I blushed to admit it even to myself , there was in me a growing desire , a sexual awareness , that Johnnie had set in motion , an awareness that no other man had ever triggered . I wanted him , with a terrifying fierceness . Astonishingly enough , it was my own voice I heard there in the darkness , begging this man to make love to me . `` Love me , Johnnie '' . `` I will , kitten '' ! ! Outside , in the summertime fields behind the motel , a thousand crickets serenaded us . `` Will you always love me this way '' ? ? `` Uh huh . Always '' . `` Mmm '' . And I snuggled closer to the man I loved . It was as blissful and fulfilling a night as any bride ever experienced . I had had no wedding ceremony , no witnesses , no certificate of marriage , but I had all the joy that goes with them . `` Johnnie ? ? `` It can't be wrong , can it ? ? Not really '' . Johnnie rose on one elbow . `` Stop worrying . It's never wrong if love is real '' . I took great comfort from his words , and smiled to myself in the darkness . Infinite peace , complete contentment . Idiot's delight , I later discovered . I felt no conflict between what I was doing and my strict religious upbringing . I had always resisted the passes made at me by other kids , and many times I had thought about my love for Johnnie who , being thirty , brought a maturity to love that the kids around town could know nothing about . I had also thought a lot about how God must look on true love , and so in a way I was keeping my promise to God , my promise to remain pure until I was married . I was practically a bride , after all . There would have been a ceremony if it had been possible . Of this , I had no doubt . Wouldn't Johnnie do practically anything in the world to insure my happiness ? ? Of course he would . He'd not only told me so , he'd proved it . It wasn't Johnnie's fault that he was hopelessly tied down to that frightful woman who did her best to make his life unbearable . Just because he was honorable enough to want to continue supporting his two children , as any decent man would , that was no reason he should be denied his own small share of happiness too . And if I could contribute to that , I'd do it . The cost didn't matter . No price is too high when true love is at stake . And I had no doubts about how true this love was . I'd never even petted with a boy , and after I met Johnnie he never touched me for the longest while , not until I all but threw myself at him . He was plenty attentive , all right , but he behaved like a gentleman , and I figured that , emotionally , I was closer to his age than to my own eighteen and a half . What could a mere twelve years matter ? ? It wasn't , I was sure , a difference in age that came between people , but a difference in maturity . And hadn't I rescued him from Lucille Warren ? ? She'd have gotten him , if I hadn't stopped her . After all , Lucille Warren was a husband-stealer from way back . But I'd been a good girl and now God was blessing me with the gift of this magnificent man and the wondrous love we shared . It was only fitting that we seek out whatever joy our union might bring . `` Love me '' ? ? `` Uh-huh . Love you '' . `` Always and always , Johnnie '' ? ? `` Always '' . `` Mmm '' . Convention time in Boston . A chill wind in the air and the narrow streets packed with snow . From the entire eastern half of the nation they'd be coming , members of the Young Christians' League , and I'd been chosen to represent our chapter . I had mixed emotions about going . I'd been seeing Johnnie almost a year now , but I still didn't want to leave him for five whole days . But I had looked forward so much to being with this church group . I hadn't been doing as much work as I used to in Westfield and I felt funny about that and wanted to work harder than ever . I wanted to just throw myself into the good works of this fine group . So I went to Boston . The first meeting was held in Faneuil Hall , a great big place where we were able to meet members from all the other states . My cousin Alma , at whose home I was staying during the convention , introduced me to a group of young people from Rhode Island . One of them was a very friendly , lovely fellow named Ronald , a boy about my age with slick , blond hair and dancing blue eyes . He looked very different from Johnnie -- in fact , he looked sort of like me . I thought so , and he mentioned it , and Alma said so too . After the meeting , there was going to be a party at someone's house . I assumed Alma would get me there , but in the confusion of the meeting breaking up , we were separated . Outside the hall , I anxiously looked around for her , then all at once there was a hand on my elbow . `` Hey , there , beautiful twin of mine '' , Ronald said . `` Need a pumpkin to get to the party '' ? ? I couldn't help laughing with him . `` Well , I should find Alma '' -- I began . `` Alma , Schmalma . Come along with me '' . I went . By the time we arrived , the party was already going strong . A couple of the girls were laughing rather shrilly and I realized they were drinking . My folks wouldn't dream of having alcohol in the house , so my first taste of it had been -- of course -- with Johnnie . I hadn't liked it at first -- it was bitter and burning . But when Johnnie disguised the taste with ginger ale , I enjoyed it . Of course I enjoyed 'most anything if I did it with Johnnie . Johnnie I suddenly realized he'd been totally out of my thoughts all evening . But that was only natural , I decided ; ; surely he was still resting snugly in my heart . `` I don't see Alma anywhere '' , I said . `` She's invisible tonight . C'mon , let's find out where they're keeping the glasses '' . I drew back . `` I -- I don't think so , Ronald . Not for me '' . `` Aw , come on '' . `` No -- really '' . He shrugged . `` Okay . But at least come along while I get lubricated '' . The kitchen was jammed . Strange faces , most of them , and I wasn't even sure all of them had come from the League meeting . Under normal circumstances , he had a certain bright-eyed all-American-boy charm , with great appeal for young ladies , old ladies , and dogs . Today , he looked like an Astronaut who had left his vitamin pills on the bureau and spent six months in space : hollow eyes , hollow cheeks , hollow stomach . Breakfast , he thought . A shot of orange juice would make everything seem better . He looked around his little Eden : bureau , bed , table , chair , two-burner stove . Then he remembered . `` You share a refrigerator '' , Mrs. Kirby had said , and somehow , at midnight , after the long drive from New York in pelting rain , that had sounded reasonable . In the cold light of day , it seemed a lunatic arrangement . Share bath , maybe -- but share refrigerator ? ? She had explained it -- something about summer people's eating out and not enough space in the units . And where was the thing ? ? He remembered seeing it last night , when he put away his small store of bachelor-type eatables . Ah , yes -- his half of a refrigerator stood outside , on the `` curving veranda '' between Unit Number Three and Unit Number Four . It was still raining , and Mrs. Kirby's cottages bloomed through the gray haze like the names they bore , vivid blue and green and magenta . Charlie downed his orange juice and one of the long , skinny green pills , his spirits as damp as the day . This vacation had seemed like a good idea last week , when his doctor had prescribed it . `` Take a full month '' , the doctor had said . `` Lots of sun , lots of rest . The red pills are a vitamin-and-iron compound . This is a sleeping capsule . The others will make you a little more comfortable until you get it licked . You young men get to be my age , you won't take flu so lightly '' . Charlie had accepted the diagnosis without comment . The doctor could call it anything from flu to beriberi ; ; but Charlie knew what was wrong with him and knew , too , that there was no pill to cure it . He had loved and lost Vivian Wayne to somebody else , had watched her marry the somebody else , and had caught a bear of a cold by kissing the bride good-by forever , which was really piling it on . He had caught , too , like an ailment , a confirmed distrust of women . Once burned -- scalded , really , because Vivian had given him every encouragement -- forever shy . From now on , his was going to be a man's world : the North Woods , duck blinds at dawning , beer and poker and male secretaries . Meanwhile , he had this miserable cold , and as he leaned against the refrigerator , watching the rain make sandy puddles at his feet , the doctor's prescription for lots of sun seemed like a hollow mockery . In these damp circumstances , he was an odds-on bet to develop pneumonia . He looked up to see Mrs. Kirby , awesome in a black-and-yellow polka-dotted slicker , bearing down on him . `` Three-day blow '' ! ! She bellowed triumphantly . He had noticed before that the natives seemed to regard really filthy weather as a kind of Pyhrric victory over the tourists . `` Fine , day after tomorrow '' , she added . `` I hope so '' , he said . `` I've got this cold . Thought I'd bake it out in the sun '' . `` Ah '' . She studied him briefly . `` You've got a peaked look . Better get in out of the wet '' . Charlie forbore to mention that the wet was somewhat universal , Peony being less than weatherproof . As for its being fine , day after tomorrow , he had the unhappy conviction that it would never be fine again , with Vivian lost to him forever . He could imagine her at this minute , honeymooning in Nassau with what's-his-name , lounging on golden sands , looking forward to a life of unalloyed bliss . All Charlie could look forward to was a yellow pill at noon , a salami sandwich for lunch , and a lonely old age -- if he lived that long . He leafed through the light reading provided by Mrs. Kirby for her guests : four separate adventures of the Bobbsey Twins ( At the Seashore , At the Mountains , On the Farm , and In Danger ) and several agricultural bulletins on the treatment of hoof-and-mouth disease in cattle , hideously illustrated . He dozed , only to dream of Vivian , and woke , only to crash into the night table , bruising his other shin . He took a yellow pill , only to choke on it , and went for the salami , only to find something alive in the refrigerator -- something pink and fuzzy . His first thought was that Mrs. Kirby , in her mania for color , had dyed a cat and that cat had somehow managed to open the refrigerator door and climb in ; ; but on further investigation , the thing proved to be a sweater , of the long-hair variety that sheds onto men's jackets -- pale , pale pink and , according to the label , size thirty-four . He thought about it for a minute , could find no reasonable explanation for the presence of a sweater in the refrigerator , got the salami , bread , and a Bermuda onion , and put the whole thing out of his mind . Next morning , he found a note in the refrigerator . `` Would you mind wrapping your onion '' ? ? Said this note . `` The smell permeates everything '' ! ! Everything being the sweater , a lipstick case , and a squirt bottle of Kissin' Kare pink hand lotion . The note paper was pink , too , and the handwriting small and dainty and utterly feminine . Not that he had supposed , considering the evidence , that he was sharing this refrigerator with a member of the Beach Patrol . He scrawled `` Sorry '' across the bottom of the note and then , against his better judgment , added : `` Don't you eat '' ? ? He didn't want to encourage anything here ; ; but on the other hand , he didn't want her swiping his salami . `` Not onions '' , came the answer the following day . `` Ugh '' . Must have really smelled up her sweater , he thought , and wondered idly just why she kept the sweater fast-frozen . But then , as he well knew , women are not guided by logic or common sense . Take Vivian . Yes , take Vivian . Somebody had . Now , if this were Vivian next door to him and if , for some obscure female reason , she kept her clothes in the refrigerator , they would not be pink . They would be black or white or horse-blanket plaid , chic and splashy , like Vivian herself . Pink , Vivian once had told him , was for baby girls , and grown-up girls who wore pink were subconsciously clinging to their infancy . `` Why does this girl keep a sweater in the refrigerator '' ? ? He mused aloud . Eh '' ? ? It was Mrs. Kirby , making her toilsome way along the veranda , laden with a clattery collection of mops , brushes , and pails . `` What's that you say '' ? ? `` Oh , nothing . Just glad the rain's stopped '' . `` Oh , yes . Just look at that sky . Be a scorcher by afternoon '' . `` I hope so . I've got this cold '' . `` So you said '' . She scrutinized him . `` My , you're peaked . You want to watch out that you don't get burned to an ash , first sunny day . I must remember to warn the girl next to you in Larkspur . That pale kind's the worst '' . That pale kind , Charlie thought . Hardly an inviting description . But then , neither was peaked . He could hear Mrs. Kirby now , warning her pale guest against sunburn . `` I spoke to the fellow next door , too '' , she might say . `` He's that peaked kind '' . Surely there was a better word . Charlie looked in the mirror . Run-down , iron-poor . He looked more closely . Frail , feeble -- peaked . Clearly , two damp days with the Bobbsey Twins had done him no good . The sun , blazing hot as prophesied , was far from kind to Mrs. Kirby's varicolored properties . When Charlie came up from the beach for his four-o'clock pill , the whole establishment ( gaudy enough when seen through mist and fog ) looked like a floodlit modern painting -- great blocks of dizzy color , punctuated at regular intervals by the glaring white of five community refrigerators . This weekend , he thought , he would look around for some more subdued retreat , with Cape roses , maybe , at the door . He could not imagine a flower's being brave enough to grow beside Peony , Larkspur , and the rest . The sweater was gone from the refrigerator , and in its place was a large plastic bag , full of wet pink clothes . No wonder she was so pale , wearing all those cold clothes . He got a red pill and a beer and then , on impulse , transferred the rest of his salami to her side of the refrigerator and scrawled `` Be my guest '' on the wrapping . It gave him a good feeling . `` M-m-m . Thanks '' , was her answer the next day . The note was propped against his pill bottles and bore a postscript : `` You're not at all well , are you '' ? ? `` I've got this cold '' , he wrote . Not that it was any of her business . `` It's none of my business '' , said the next note , `` but my Aunt Elsie used to take lemon juice and honey in hot water for a cold , and she lived to be ninety-six . I mean , she's still living , and she's ninety-six . Why don't you try that '' ? ? `` I don't have a lemon '' . He had to write very small to get it on the bottom of the scrap of paper . By the next morning , she had turned the paper over . `` Gee , neither do I '' . Charlie grinned . She didn't sound like a pale girl . She sounded a little like a redhead . But then , redheads are often pale . He stuck his head in Mrs. Kirby's little rental office . `` I guess that redhead next to me took your advice . I haven't seen her on the beach '' . `` You won't , if you're looking for a redhead . She's got browny hair '' . He spent that afternoon on the beach , looking for a pale , browny-haired girl in a pink bathing suit . There were pink bathing suits on blondes , and browny-haired girls in red or black or green bathing suits . There were a sprinkling of daring bikinis and a preponderance of glorified tank suits . Up on a dune , he saw a girl , all by herself , sitting on a camp stool before an easel and absorbed in her painting . He paid little attention to her because she was a redhead and because she was wearing white -- one of those bulky , turtle-neck sweaters . On the beach , there were pale girls and not-so-pale girls . And he saw them all as he walked up and down . At two that morning , he was still walking -- up and down Peony , up and down the veranda , up and down the silent , moonlit beach . Finally , in desperation , he opened the refrigerator , filched her hand lotion , and left a note . `` I've got this sunburn '' , said the note , `` and I used some of your hand lotion . Hope you don't mind '' . `` Of course I don't mind '' , she answered . `` You're having a miserable time , aren't you ? ? Use all the lotion you want , and for goodness' sake , stay in out of the sun for a couple of days '' . This was a very warm , sympathetic girl , he decided . Sympathy is a fine quality in a woman . Now Vivian , for instance , was not too long on sympathy . She felt , and said , that sympathy only made people feel sorry for themselves ; ; it was a tough world , and you had to be tough to hold your own . He didn't know what was so tough about Vivian's world , slopping around Nassau with what's-his-name . Suppose what's-his-name got a sunburn ? ? Charlie couldn't see Vivian offering any hand lotion . She might peel him , once the worst of the agony was over . Charlie spent the next two days in his pajama bottoms , waiting for the fire in his back to subside , and used generous quantities of the hand lotion . Correspondence passed back and forth . `` How's your sunburn now ? ? The only thing , this lotion has glycerin in it , and that whitens the skin , so if you're so anxious to get a tan , you may not want to use it '' . `` I'm not that anxious , but maybe that's why you're so fair '' . `` That Mrs. Kirby ! ! I'll bet she told you I was puny , too . How's your cold '' ? ? `` Broiled out . She didn't say you were puny . Are you ? ? What's puny '' ? ? `` Puny goes with pale and peaked . Do you have anything to read while you're shut up ? ? There are two things here about Surviving in the Wilderness , and a book called ' Tom Swift and His Speedy Canoe ' ; ; but the picture of Tom Swift is pretty sinister . Also the canoe '' . There was a crowd in the stands for a change and the sun was hot . The new Riverside pitcher turned out to have an overhand fast ball that took a hop . For a few innings the Anniston team couldn't figure him out . Then , in the fifth , Anniston's kid catcher caught onto a curve and smacked the ball into left center field . Eddie Lee , Riverside's redheaded playing manager , ran after the ball but it rolled past him . Phil Rossoff cut over to center from left field to get the relay . Eddie caught up with the ball near the fence and threw it to Phil . `` Third ! ! Third base '' ! ! Eddie shouted . Phil spun around and made an accurate throw into Mike Deegan's hands on third base . Mike caught the ball just as the catcher slid into the bag . But the Anniston boy had begun his slide too late . He came into the bag with his body and Mike Deegan brought the ball down full in his face . `` You bastard '' ! ! The Anniston catcher screamed . He jumped to his feet and started to throw punches . Mike Deegan tossed his glove away and began to swing at the catcher . This brought in everybody from both sides , while the spectators stood up and added to the uproar . The fighters were separated in a few minutes . The game was resumed . But Mike Deegan was boiling mad now . When the inning was over he cursed the Anniston catcher all the way into the dugout . Phil Rossoff , coming in from left field , stopped at the water fountain for a drink . Mike Deegan was standing beside it , facing the field . He was eyeing the Anniston catcher warming up his pitcher before the inning began . `` Keep your eyes open , sonny '' ! ! Mike yelled to the catcher . `` You're in for trouble '' . The Anniston catcher did not reply with words . He simply turned to Mike and smiled . This so infuriated Deegan that he spun around and said : `` I'll get that little bastard . So help me God , I'll get him '' . Phil Rossoff said : `` Why don't you leave him alone '' ? ? `` Mind your own goddamn business '' , Mike Deegan said . Phil shrugged . He stepped into the dugout , wondering why Deegan was always looking for trouble . Maybe the answer was in his eyes . When Deegan smiled his eyes never fit in with his lips . In the last of the sixth inning Mike Deegan got up to bat and hit a fast ball over the left fielder's head . By the time the fielder got his hands on the ball Deegan was rounding third base and heading for home . The left fielder threw and it was a good one . But Mike had no chance of being tagged . The Anniston catcher was straddling home plate . All Deegan had to do was slide , fall away , but instead , he rammed into the catcher . Both fell heavily to the ground . Only Mike got to his feet . He went back to touch home plate , turned and walked to the dugout without looking back . The Anniston players and their manager ran out on the field . They poured water over their catcher's face . He did not move . Then the manager called for a doctor . The Riverside physician came down to look over the injured ballplayer . Then , quickly , and a little nervously , the doctor ordered a couple of ballplayers to carry the catcher into the dressing room . Mike Deegan was sitting on the bench , watching . When the ballplayers started to carry the catcher off the field he said : `` That ought to teach the sonofabitch '' . Phil Rossoff , seated next to Deegan , got up and moved to the other end of the bench . The Anniston manager was coming over to the Riverside dugout . He was followed by four of his men . It began to look as if something was going to happen . Mike sat quietly watching the manager come nearer . Eddie Lee moved over to Mike Deegan's side . No one said a word . The Anniston manager came right up to the dugout in front of Mike . His face was flushed . `` Deegan '' , the manager said , his voice pitched low , quivering . `` That was a rotten thing to do '' . `` For God's sake '' , Mike said , waving the manager away . `` Stop it , will you ? ? Tell your guys not to block the plate '' . `` You didn't have to ram him '' . `` That's what you say '' . The Anniston manager looked at Eddie Lee . It was a cold and calculated look . He turned and went back across the field to his dugout . He called in the pitcher who had been pitching , and a big , heavy , powerfully built right hander moved out to the mound for Anniston . The game started again and in the eighth inning Mike Deegan came up to bat . Everyone in the ball park seemed to be standing and shouting . The first ball the hefty pitcher threw came in for Mike's head . Deegan fell into the dirt , the ball going over him . He arose slowly and brushed himself off . He got back into the batter's box and on the next pitch dropped into the dirt again . `` Hit the bum '' ! ! Somebody yelled from the Anniston bench . In the Riverside dugout Frankie Ricco , shortstop , whispered into Phil's ear : `` There's gonna be a fight '' . `` Look at those bastards '' ! ! Charlie Haydon , a pitcher , said . `` They're looking for trouble '' . Mike was slow getting into the box this time . When he finally did he had to duck his head quickly away as the pitch came in . `` Listen '' ! ! He shouted to the pitcher . `` One more and I'm coming out there '' ! ! `` I'll be waiting '' ! ! The pitcher yelled back . Mike Deegan pounded the rubber plate with the end of his bat . He stood flat-footed in the box , but not very close to the plate now . The pitcher wound up and the ball came in straight for Mike's head . Deegan dropped , got up , turned and , holding the bat with both hands up against his chest , began to walk slowly out to the mound . The pitcher tossed his glove away and came towards Mike Deegan . They were both walking towards each other , unhurried . Riverside and Anniston players rushed out on the field . In the next moment , it seemed , the infield was crowded with spectators , ballplayers , cops , kids and a dog . There was much shouting and screaming . Fights sprang up and were quickly squelched . Mike and the Anniston pitcher were pulled away before they even came together . Phil Rossoff and two other Riverside players did not go out on the field when the fighting started . After the game , Phil was taking off his sweatshirt in the dressing room when Mike Deegan came in . `` It's a helluva thing '' , Mike said , looking at Phil , `` when a guy's own team-mate won't come out and help him in a fight '' . Phil sighed and pulled the wet sweatshirt over his head . Frankie Ricco sat down on the bench near Phil . The other players were undressing quietly . Eddie Lee had not come in yet . Mike went over to Phil and stood over him . `` Why the hell didn't you come out when you saw them gang up on me '' ? ? `` I didn't think it was necessary '' . `` Well ! ! Now that's just fine ! ! You didn't think it was necessary '' . Mike placed both his hands on his hips . He pushed his jaw forward . `` Listen , wise guy , if you think I'm gonna do all the fighting for this ball club you're crazy '' . Mike had a good two inches over Phil and Phil had to look up into Mike's face . `` I didn't ask you to fight for the ball club '' , Phil said slowly . `` Nobody else did , either '' . `` You trying to say I started the fight '' ? ? `` I'm not trying to say anything '' . Phil turned away and opened his locker , and then he heard Mike Deegan say : `` You're yellow , Rossoff '' ! ! And Phil banged his locker door shut and spun around . But before anything could happen Frankie Ricco was between them and Eddie Lee had come into the dressing room . `` Phil , come into my office '' , Eddie said . Phil followed Eddie into the office and shut the door . He sat down before Eddie's desk . `` I'm doing you a favor '' , Eddie said quickly . `` You get your unconditional release as of today '' . Phil's eyes widened just a trifle . `` The best thing for you to do '' , Eddie said , `` is go home . You don't belong in professional baseball '' . Phil had to clear his throat . `` Is this because of what happened out there '' ? ? `` No '' , Eddie said . `` But it does confirm what I've suspected all along '' . Phil stood up . `` Listen ! ! This is the second time . '' `` Sit down , sit down '' , Eddie said . `` I'm not saying you're yellow . I am saying you're not a professional ballplayer '' . Eddie Lee leaned forward over the desk . `` Now listen to me , Phil . I'm not steering you wrong . You haven't got the heart for baseball '' . Phil shook his head and Eddie frowned . Suddenly his voice grew hard . `` What the hell do you think baseball is ? ? You're not in the big leagues , but if you can't give and take down here what the hell do you think it'll be like up there '' ? ? Phil started to say something but Eddie cut him short . `` Now don't tell me what a good ball player you are . I know you've got talent . But what you haven't got is the heart to back up that talent with . The heart , Phil . You just haven't got the heart for pro-ball , and that's it '' . Dazed , Phil said : `` I don't get it . My batting average '' Eddie stood up abruptly , then sat down just as abruptly . `` What difference does your batting average make ? ? Or your fielding average . Or even the way you run bases . I tell you when it's necessary to hurt in order to win -- you won't do it . That's what I mean by no heart for the game . Baseball's no cinch . Deegan had no business ramming into that kid out there . He did it because he knows for each guy he puts out of commission that's one less who might take his job away later on . What the hell do you think baseball is ? ? A sport ? ? It's a way of life , goddamit ! ! And you've got to be ready to cut to ribbons anybody who wants to take your way of life away from you '' ! ! He's wrong ! ! Phil thought . It's only his opinion . There were other clubs in this league . He stood up slowly . He was a little pale and shaky . His lips felt glued together . `` I think you're wrong , Eddie '' , he said finally . Eddie nodded . `` Okay . You'll get your pay in the morning '' . Phil turned and left the room , hearing Eddie say : `` Someday you'll see I was right '' . Phil shut the door behind him . Outside in the dressing room , Frankie Ricco sat on the bench dressed in his street clothes . `` What happened '' ? ? Frankie asked . Phil said : `` I got my release '' . `` You crazy '' ? ? Phil shrugged . `` What for '' ? ? Phil sighed . Frankie shook his head . `` I don't get it '' . `` I don't know '' , Phil said . They were silent for a few moments . Then Frankie said : `` What are you gonna do '' ? ? Phil started to take his clothes off and Frankie sat down on the bench again . Phil took off one shoe and stared at it . `` Don't take it like this '' , Frankie said . `` Hell , plenty of guys get let out and come back later . The leagues are full of guys like that '' . Phil was very quiet . `` What are you gonna do , Phil '' ? ? Phil did not answer . `` Why not try another club '' ? ? Phil looked up . What the hell right did Eddie have saying a thing like that ? ? `` Springfield's in tomorrow '' , Frankie said . `` Talk to Whitey Jackson '' . He just didn't know what he was talking about , saying a thing like that . `` Will you do it , Phil '' ? ? `` Do what '' ? ? `` Ask Whitey for a job '' . Phil nodded . `` Sure '' , he said . `` Springfield come in tomorrow '' ? ? Frankie nodded . `` I'll speak to Whitey '' . `` Atta boy '' . `` I'll talk to him , all right '' . `` Don't worry '' , Frankie said . `` You'll get a job there . He needs outfielders bad '' . `` I'm not worried about it '' , Phil said . `` That's the way to talk . What else did Eddie have to say '' ? ? `` Nothing '' , Phil said . Richard's next interest seemed the product of his insularity . His broad reading took him into certain by-ways of religion and the subject of religion began to fascinate him . When he was twelve he took to reading St. Augustine and Aquinas , then Lao-tse , Confucius , Mencius , Suzuki , Hindu tomes by endless Krishnaists and numerous socio-archaeological papers . For his birthday , because Richard had seen them in a store and asked for them , his mother bought him the Zend-Avesta and a little image of the Indian god , Acala . And one day , on her own , his mother came home with a present entitled The Book of the Dead , which she suspected Richard would enjoy . He was enormously happy with her gift and smiled , then went to his room to read . At dinner one night , when he was fourteen , Richard announced , `` There is only one god '' . `` Did you think there were two '' ? ? Grinned his father . `` You don't understand '' , Richard said gloomily . Through quiet laughter his mother said , `` Don't speak to your father like that , Richard '' . Richard seldom spoke anyhow and he didn't speak to his parents about religion again . His interest in the formal study of religion waned when he was sixteen and he substituted for it an interest in Asian affairs . Although he still didn't speak to anyone , he grew fond of saying , `` The future lies in Asia '' , when the opportunity arose , and when he graduated from high school his parents sent him to New York to give him a foundation , they said , for his life in Asian studies . Richard was a solitary student in New York and acquired , in his remoteness , a thorough if bookish knowledge of Asian lore , literature , life , politics and history . He was awarded a fellowship to continue his studies in Tokyo and he packed up his clothes , the biwa upon which he had been practicing and his image of Acala , and left to spend a week at home before leaving the country . The week at home was not comfortable . His mother , who had seen little of him for four years , appeared worried about his sailing off by himself for an Orient which , she herself having slight knowledge of it , had to be distrusted . She seemed to work to grow close to her son in the few days he spent at home , talking to him about some of the more pleasant moments of his childhood and then trying to talk to him about those things in which he alone was interested . `` Do you still have The Book of the Dead '' ? ? She asked him and , laughing , she added , `` I was nervous about buying a book with a title like that , but I knew you'd like it '' . `` Yes '' , he lied to shorten the conversation , `` I still have it '' . He was no longer able to relax in the presence of his parents and found it difficult to keep up a conversation with his mother or father , no matter the subject . As for The Book of the Dead , it along with his other books on religion had been incarcerated in a furnace in the basement of the building in which he had lived in New York . He had dusted each of the books carefully and carried them all to the basement and , trembling at having to open the big furnace , given them up to the flames . Then he sped from the dark basement and returned to his room and cried . Richard left America with his clothes , his biwa and his image of Acala and , on the freighter which took him to Japan , he plucked at the biwa , trying to make the sounds he wrought resemble an ancient Japanese tune he had once heard . During his second week at sea he brought the curious melody out of the instrument and suddenly wanted to force the biwa to remain at just that moment in its history when it had given him pleasure . He stole from his cabin late that night and crept out into a gusty North Pacific wind and dropped the biwa into the water . It was so dark that he didn't see it hit the water and the noisy rush of the ocean kept him from hearing it . It was as though the biwa had been eaten up by the wind . In Tokyo Richard took up a life similar to that which he had lived in New York , except that he had replaced his biwa with a friend . An American student named Charlotte Adams had refused to take notice of his evident aversion to people and had at last succeeded in getting him to talk to her . He had nothing much to say to her but that he said anything seemed to please her and he accompanied her on some of her unusually searching tours of Tokyo . In Charlotte , Richard saw a frankness and a zest for doing things which , after a fashion , he envied . In time , he grew to depend upon her occasional company and she at length was able to encourage him to participate in more social activity . She convinced him that he ought to be a member of some of the small tea-drinking parties she held at her rooms and in the end he complied with her wishes , although it was only rarely that he added anything to the random conversations . At one such gathering Charlotte announced , `` I was at Ryusenji today . Have you ever been to Ryusenji '' ? ? No one had . `` Well , it's at Fudomae and there was a tan young man , quite naked , taking a shower in the pool . I was thoroughly startled '' . Richard thought it a more promising remark than any made during the last conversation , but Charlotte's manner during the gatherings was more flippant and superficial than when she was alone with him and he was sure her remark would lead to nothing much better than the pointless words which had preceded it . Three of the four persons present , all foreign students in Tokyo , had been playing a game of judging popular Japanese foods by the In and Out system , an equation in which Zen philosophy was used as the modifier . Soba , udon and tea were In because they could be taken noisily . Sushi was Out because it was pretentious . Sashimi was In , Samuel Burns had suggested , because it was too far Out to stay Out , even if it was a little pretentious . Richard had kept his eyes down throughout the game , the very sound of the chatter nearly painful to his ears . `` He wasn't the least bit disturbed by my watching him '' , said Charlotte . `` Did you watch him '' ? ? Asked a red-haired girl named Ceecee Witter . `` I shouldn't have been able to do that '' . `` Well I was able to do it '' , Charlotte said with no sign of irritation . `` For a minute , anyhow . I'm surprised no one has been there . I've been there a number of times . Sam , I thought you knew everything about Tokyo . You've never been to Ryusenji '' ? ? `` I've heard about it '' , Samuel Burns said . `` There's a little place there called Lovers Mound dedicated to Gompachi and Komurasaki '' . `` Yes , a little parkish place '' , Charlotte said , and concluded , `` Anyhow , it's all very nice . And the man who brought sweet potatoes into Kanto is buried there , next to a beautiful seated statue of Fudo . Oh , that's what I meant to tell you . This is the interesting part , Richard '' , she had a bothersome habit of trying to pull him into the talking . `` There was that fellow out there in the bitter cold '' -- `` My God , it was cold today '' , said Samuel Burns . `` Twenty-two or twenty-three '' . `` And the water would be still colder '' , Ceecee seemed to shiver at the thought of it . `` And your golden god '' , said Samuel Burns , `` probably went right home and poured himself into a boiling bath . It would kill one of us '' . `` But the point is '' , Charlotte said , `` there he was , freezing , naked in a little stream of water at Ryusenji , all in worship of Fudo , the god of fire '' . Richard's dark eyes came up and seemed for the tiniest moment to reflect sharp light . It was true ; ; Fudo , the god of wisdom , was also thought of as the Japanese version of Acala . The conversation went on but Richard stopped listening . He found himself trying to remember something , but he couldn't decide even the nature of what it was he worked to recall . He had almost given up when he realized that the dropping of his biwa into the icy jowls of the black Pacific was the memory for which he had been searching . Perhaps he sensed some connection between the incident on the freighter and the ascetic at Ryusenji , he was unable to put it together . That night , after leaving Charlotte's apartment , Richard walked about for a time before returning to his room . When he at last did go to his room , he couldn't sleep and instead paced up and down before his little image of Acala , thinking first of Charlotte's tale of the man at Ryusenji , then of his biwa and the invisible Pacific waters . And the next morning , not sure of why he went , he took the train to Fudomae and walked to Ryusenji . He was surprised by the sharp sensation he experienced as he approached the pool which Charlotte had mentioned . He went through a gate to stand at the edge of the water and gazed at the two thin falls which dropped from large spigots high at the back of the pool . On the hillside above was caged what might have been an incarnation of Fudo , or perhaps a demon . The strange creature , housed in wire , made him shudder . The sensation he so overwhelmingly realized was one which told him he had been there before but he knew he had not , and could not recall any place he had visited to be likened to the limpid green water or the little fountain-falls or the green demon imprisoned beyond his reach . He left the pool and climbed the steep stone stairs to the temple , and the sense of familiarity with the place would not leave him . Into a little well before the temple he dropped a hundred-yen coin and then he had an urge to sound the bell before the temple , to take hold of the rope and crash it against the circle of bronze ; ; but the spirit he wished to call out would not , he knew , come in the person of the temple priest . Instead , he walked around the temple and mounted still another flight of stairs and stood before the seated Fudo at their head . The black Fudo seemed to stare rigidly back at him and Richard's eyes were caught by the Fudo's in fascination , and then Richard was shocked as , all at once , flames shot out from the sharp features of Fudo's face and there was a terrible metallic scraping sound , as if the large statue were about to burst from some pressure within it . Then the flames were gone , the stillness fell upon the severe black face and Richard began to tremble violently . Suddenly he emptied his pockets of all his coins and dropped them into the box before the seated Fudo and hurried back down both stairways and away from the temple , never looking back . He walked all the miles back to his room . He seemed to have picked up a virus that day , because the next morning he had a small cough and felt a bit hot . He stayed home , reading and refusing to think about his frightening experience at Ryusenji . But the process of refusing to think about it was an active reminder in itself and he couldn't rid himself of a consciousness of it throughout the day . The cold lingered , making sleep difficult that night , and he remained in bed still the next morning , now unable to keep from thinking about the inexplicable sight of burning metal , the wretched sound , the unbearable feeling of having been to a remote Tokyo temple at some earlier time in his life . All of the elements of the experience were impossible and yet the reality of them was heavy upon him and he resolved never again to visit the temple at Fudomae . I was thinking of the heat and of water that morning when I was plowing the stubble field far across the hill from the farm buildings . It had grown hot early that day , and I hoped that the boy , my brother's son , would soon come across the broad black area of plowed ground , carrying the jar of cool water . The boy usually was sent out at about that time with the water , and he always dragged an old snow-fence lath or a stick along , to play with . He pretended that the lath was a tractor and he would drag it through the dirt and make buzzing , tractor sounds with his lips . I almost ran over the snake before I could stop the tractor in time . I had turned at the corner of the field and I had to look back to raise the plow and then to drop it again into the earth , and I was thinking of the boy and the water anyway , and when I looked again down the furrow , the snake was there . It lay half in the furrow and half out , and the front wheels had rolled nearly up to it when I put in the clutch . The tractor was heavily loaded with the weight of the plow turning the earth , and the tractor stopped instantly . The snake slid slowly and with great care from the new ridge the plow had made , into the furrow and did not go any further . I had never liked snakes much , I still had that kind of quick panic that I'd had as a child whenever I saw one , but this snake was clean and bright and very beautiful . He was multi-colored and graceful and he lay in the furrow and moved his arched and tapered head only so slightly . Go out of the furrow , snake , I said , but it did not move at all . I pulled the throttle of the tractor in and out , hoping to frighten him with the noise , but the snake only flicked its black , forked tongue and faced the huge tractor wheel , without fright or concern . I let the engine idle then , and I got down and went around the wheel and stood beside it . My movement did frighten the snake and it raised its head and trailed delicately a couple of feet and stopped again , and its tongue was working very rapidly . I followed it , looking at the brilliant colors on its tubular back , the colors clear and sharp and perfect , in orange and green and brown diamonds the size of a baby's fist down its back , and the diamonds were set one within the other and interlaced with glistening jet-black . The colors were astonishing , clear and bright , and it was as if the body held a fire of its own , and the colors came through that transparent flesh and skin , vivid and alive and warm . The eyes were clear and black and the slender body was arched slightly . His flat and gracefully tapered head lifted as I looked at him and the black tongue slipped in and out of that solemn mouth . You beauty , I said , I couldn't kill you . You are much too beautiful . I had killed snakes before , when I was younger , but there had been no animal like this one , and I knew it was unthinkable that an animal such as that should die . I picked him up , and the length of him arched very carefully and gracefully and only a little wildly , and I could feel the coolness of that radiant , fire-colored body , like splendid ice , and I knew that he had eaten only recently because there were two whole and solid little lumps in the forepart of him , like fieldmice swallowed whole might make . The body caressed through my hands like cool satin , and my hands , usually tanned and dark , were pale beside it , and I asked it where the fire colors could come from the coolness of that body . I lowered him so he would not fall and his body slid out onto the cool , newly-plowed earth , from between my pale hands . The snake worked away very slowly and delicately and with a gorgeous kind of dignity and beauty , and he carried his head a little above the rolled clods . The sharp , burning colors of his body stood brilliant and plain against the black soil , like a target . I felt good and satisfied , looking at the snake . It shone in its bright diamond color against the sun-burned stubble and the crumbled black clods of soil and against the paleness of myself . The color and beauty of it were strange and wonderful and somehow alien , too , in that dry and dusty and uncolored field . I got on the tractor again and I had to watch the plow closely because the field was drawn across the long hillside and even in that good soil there was a danger of rocks . I had my back to the corner of the triangular field that pointed towards the house . The earth was a little heavy and I had to stop once and clean the plowshares because they were not scouring properly , and I did not look back towards the place until I had turned the corner and was plowing across the upper line of the large field , a long way from where I had stopped because of the snake . I saw it all at a glance . The boy was there at the lower corner of the field , and he was in the plowed earth , stamping with ferocity and a kind of frenzied impatience . Even at that distance , with no sound but the sound of the tractor , I could tell the fierce mark of brutality on the boy . I could see the hunched-up shoulders , the savage determination , the dance of his feet as he ground the snake with his heels , and the pirouette of his arms as he whipped at it with the stick . Stop it , I shouted , but the lumbering and mighty tractor roared on , above anything I could say . I stopped the tractor and I shouted down to the boy , and I knew he could hear me , for the morning was clear and still , but he did not even hesitate in that brutal , murdering dance . It was no use . I felt myself tremble , thinking of the diamond light of that beauty I had held a few moments before , and I wanted to run down there and halt , if I could , that frenetic pirouette , catch the boy in the moment of his savagery , and save a glimmer , a remnant , of that which I remembered , but I knew it was already too late . I drove the tractor on , not looking down there ; ; I was afraid to look for fear the evil might still be going on . My head began to ache , and the fumes of the tractor began to bother my eyes , and I hated the job suddenly , and I thought , there are only moments when one sees beautiful things , and these are soon crushed , or they vanish . I felt the anger mount within me . The boy waited at the corner , with the jar of water held up to me in his hands , and the water had grown bubbly in the heat of the morning . I knew the boy well . He was eleven and we had done many things together . He was a beautiful boy , really , with finely-spun blonde hair and a smooth and still effeminate face , and his eyelashes were long and dark and brushlike , and his eyes were blue . He waited there and he smiled as the tractor came up , as he would smile on any other day . He was my nephew , my brother's son , handsome and warm and newly-scrubbed , with happiness upon his face and his face resembled my brother's and mine as well . I saw then , too , the stake driven straight and hard into the plowed soil , through something there where I had been not long before . I stopped the tractor and climbed down and the boy came eagerly up to me . `` Can I ride around with you '' ? ? He asked , as he often did , and I had as often let him be on the tractor beside me . I looked closely at his eyes , and he was already innocent ; ; the killing was already forgotten in that clear mind of his . `` No , you cannot '' , I said , pushing aside the water jar he offered to me . I pointed to the splintered , upright stake . `` Did you do that '' ? ? I asked . `` Yes '' , he said , eagerly , beginning a kind of dance of excitement . `` I killed a snake ; ; it was a big one '' . He tried to take my hand to show me . `` Why did you kill it '' ? ? `` Snakes are ugly and bad '' . `` This snake was very beautiful . Didn't you see how beautiful it was '' ? ? `` Snakes are ugly '' , he said again . `` You saw the colors of it , didn't you ? ? Have you ever seen anything like it around here '' ? ? `` Snakes are ugly and bad , and it might have bitten somebody , and they would have died '' . `` You know there are no poisonous snakes in this area . This snake could not harm anything '' . `` They eat chickens sometimes '' , the boy said . `` They are ugly and they eat chickens and I hate snakes '' . `` You are talking foolishly '' , I said . `` You killed it because you wanted to kill it , for no other reason '' . `` They're ugly and I hate them '' , the boy insisted . `` Nobody likes snakes '' . `` It was beautiful '' , I said , half to myself . The boy skipped along beside me , and he was contented with what he had done . The fire of the colors was gone ; ; there was a contorted ugliness now ; ; the colors of its back were dull and gray-looking , torn and smashed in , and dirty from the boy's shoes . The beautifully-tapered head , so delicate and so cool , had been flattened as if in a vise , and the forked tongue splayed out of the twisted , torn mouth . The snake was hideous , and I remembered , even then , the cool , bright fire of it only a little while before , and I thought perhaps the boy had always seen it dead and hideous like that , and had not even stopped to see the beauty of it in its life . I wrenched the stake out , that the boy had driven through it in the thickest part of its body , between the colored diamond crystals . I touched it and the coolness , the ice-feeling , was gone , and even then it moved a little , perhaps a tiny spasm of the dead muscles , and I hoped that it was truly dead , so that I would not have to kill it . And then it moved a little more , and I knew the snake was dying , and I would have to kill it there . The boy stood off a few feet and he had the stake again and he was racing innocently in circles , making the buzzing tractor sound with his lips . I'm sorry , I thought to the snake , for you were beautiful . I took the broken length of it around the tractor and I took one of the wrenches from the tool-kit and I struck its head , not looking at it , to kill it at last , for it could never live . The boy came around behind me , dragging the stake . `` It's a big snake , isn't it '' ? ? He said . `` I'm going to tell everybody how big a snake I killed '' . `` Don't you see what you have done '' ? ? I said . `` Don't you see the difference now '' ? ? `` It's an ugly , terrible snake '' , he said . He came up and was going to push at it with his heavy shoes . I could see the happiness in the boy's eyes , the gleeful brutality . `` Don't '' , I said . I could have slapped the boy . He looked up at me , puzzled , and he swayed his head from side to side . I thought , you little brute , you nasty , selfish , little beast , with brutality already developed within that brain and in those eyes . I wanted to slap his face , to wipe forever the insolence and brutal glee from his mouth , and I decided then , very suddenly , what I would do . Cady didn't come unglued easily , but this had not been a day of glad tidings . Tax worries , production worries , personnel worries , and the letter from Hanford College , his own alma mater , a real snapper . Hanford realized he had enrolled his son four years ago . Yes , the boy's credentials were in order -- scholastic transcript , character references , picture , health record , successful college boards . But due to the many applicants on file , would he co-operate and write a personal letter giving them his son's motivation , interests and his qualifications for leadership ? ? Cady Partlow lit his pipe with no comfort . This was it . This was the letter which would or would not enroll his son , David , in Hanford . His son who had never held an office in any organization in the eighteen years of his life . His son who did not know whether he wanted to be doctor , lawyer , merchant or chief . He wondered if he had played it wrong . Maybe he should have kept in touch . Gone back for reunions . But he had been busy building a business , being a big man in his own town just as he had been a big man at Hanford , Class of 1935 . Besides , Cady Partlow knew he wasn't the old-grad-type . It wouldn't help anyway . Look at Pete Alcorn , who hadn't missed a Hanford ball game in fifteen years . Pete's son was rejected . Hanford College , Little Ivy League , had no room for football players with low grades . Cady looked at his own son's scholastic record with pride . Good solid B average with a sprinkling of A's in math and science . Imagine his son being that good in science ! ! Mr. Partlow could still feel a cold sweat on his slightly gray temples as he remembered what a near thing chemistry had been for him at Hanford . But then , he hadn't studied very hard . Getting elected president of the student body took a lot of time and politicking . He put down his pipe and started to type . `` In response to your letter , I can in good conscience recommend my son , David , in the field of leadership '' . He stopped and looked at the picture of his son , the picture on his desk which had changed with the years from a laughing baby to a candidate for Hanford College . He didn't have to be told his son looked like him . David had the same gray eyes , high cheekbones , dark hair and a certain rugged ugliness . Height , 6' . Weight , 160 . Health , excellent . He turned back to the typewriter with a little more confidence . `` His interests range from astronomy and geology to electronics , tennis and swimming . His chief motivation for enrolling at Hanford is the desire to '' -- Mr. Partlow banged his fist on the keyboard , ruining the letter . He paced to the window and looked at the city he had helped to build . How do you tell a college president that your son doesn't know what he wants to do ? ? That you have refused to drive him into the family business or push him into a profession so you can say at the club , `` Of course David has known since he was twelve he wanted to be an engineer '' -- or a lawyer , or an editor ? ? How do you tell a college like Hanford that your son has a vast potential , that he will find himself ? ? Just give him time , give him a chance . Cady snapped the Venetian blind shut and slammed himself down before the typewriter , rolled in a fresh sheet , and gave his letter the same savage attention he bestowed on a salesman who needed to have the bucket taken off his thick head . What a production to make of a letter commending your own son ! ! His eyebrow went up in amusement at his soul-searching panic . He told Hanford his son wanted to go into the field of electronics . He told Hanford his son had participated in numerous high-school activities . He belonged to a social club , a civic group , little theater , swimming team , and had been president of the student forum as well as treasurer of the science club . He finished with a flurry of good wishes to Hanford College and signed the letter . There , that did it . Then he met the grave eyes of his wife , Anne , from the photograph next to David's . He shoved the unsealed letter into his coat pocket . Better show it to Anne and see if he had omitted anything . After all , his wife had written most of his letters for him in those first lean days of Partlow Products . Anne had a way with words . Half of it was natural , half was Smith College . Yet the whole of Anne was something she had never learned in any college . A woman had it or she didn't . Anne had it . She said what she meant and let it be . She never got on his back . He could take the advice or leave it . He whistled as he locked the office and grinned as he got on the elevator . `` You look like you just heard a real gasser , Mr. Partlow '' . Cady looked at Tom , who had taken him up and down for fifteen years . `` I was just thinking how things have changed . When I went to college they begged you to come . Be our guest ! ! It's our pleasure ! ! Now you have to be well rounded , firm in motivation and pre-packed with knowledge '' ! ! Tom slid open the door to the lobby . `` That's a fact , Mr. Partlow . My John applied to six colleges before he got in '' . `` Going to State '' ? ? `` No . He's president of the rocket club here , you know . Always messing around with science stuff . Real bright along those lines , you might say . He got a science scholarship to Yale '' . `` Oh '' , said Mr. Partlow , `` that's fine , Tom . Just fine '' . As he drove home through the thinning traffic , Cady felt the unease growing . He hadn't told anyone , but he , too , had applied to five colleges for David . They had all turned down his son . Weakness in leadership . So sorry . Limited interests . So sorry . No clear motivation . So sorry . He suddenly realized when he walked into his own pretty darned expensive house that he needed the Martini Anne had waiting for him . But tonight his drink tasted like branch water and even his favorite meal of steak and tossed salad gave no surcease from the growing weight of the letter in his pocket . Nor did looking at Anne ease the tension as it usually did . He liked looking at Anne . Most people did . He liked her blond hair and the sprinkle of freckles across her nose . From those navy-blue eyes she saw things as clearly and honestly as David did . She always could sense the shag end of a woolly day . `` Board meeting tonight , Cady '' ? ? `` No , I begged off . Work to do '' . `` Can I have the car , Dad '' ? ? `` Why not let him take it , Cady ? ? I know it is midweek , but it's only eight days before commencement . Let's forget the rules '' . Cady , deep in thought , neither heard nor answered . David grinned . Carefully he put down his steak knife and said loudly , `` Mr. Chairman '' ! ! Cady Partlow's head came up like that of the proverbial fire horse . `` I'm sorry , Dave . The car ? ? Of course you can have it '' . Dave ate two pieces of pie as he did everything else , slowly , methodically and with interest . `` Hear anything from Hanford yet , Dad '' ? ? Cady begged the question . `` Don't worry about it , Dave . Your acceptance will come through '' . Dave shrugged on his sports coat and picked up the car keys . `` Don't be too sure , Dad . Charles Burke got turned down by Dartmouth and he is a straight-A student '' . Anne said it wasn't surprising because Charles was antisocial , a lone wolf , and completely one-sided . `` I can hardly say the same about you , Dave '' ! ! Dave kissed her lightly . `` Girls , my dear parent , are here to stay ! ! Get my old man to bed early . He looks a little bit frayed '' . Anne waited until the door had slammed and picked up the coffeepot . `` Let's go into the library . You do seem somewhat tattered '' . Cady trailed her with the coffee cups and settled into his favorite chair in the comfortable book-lined room . `` I didn't know I looked so dilapidated '' ! ! `` Wrong word , darling . Your fur has been rubbed the wrong way and you show it . Need any help '' ? ? `` In a way , yes . Hanford College hasn't decided on Dave's application yet . They want a letter from me on his motives , interests and leadership . Here's what I wrote '' . Cady handed her the letter , drank his coffee and waited with what he suddenly realized was belligerence . Already he could feel Anne's questioning eyes . `` I know you wrote this in a hurry , but , Cady , Dave was only acting president of the student forum for a few days . That was when half the school was down with flu '' . `` But he was president '' . `` And he wasn't really elected treasurer of the science club . He just took over the week Bill Daley was in the state basketball play-off '' . Cady stuck his jaw out . `` The fact remains he was treasurer '' . `` And the swimming team . No , Cady , he made second team . Just missed the first '' . `` A team is a team '' , insisted Cady . `` Anything else '' ? ? `` Yes '' , she said quietly . `` I don't think you've been quite honest , Cady . It isn't like you . David's interests . Astronomy . He was mad about stars at the age of nine . Geology , You and Dave used his rock collection for the bottom of the fishpond six years ago ! ! Those aren't his interests now '' . `` What do you suggest '' ? ? `` Just say he likes swimming , tennis , chess and music '' . `` Music ! ! He hasn't been to a symphony concert all season '' . Anne smiled . `` But he plays bass with Chief Crazy Horse and his Five Colts '' ! ! `` You mean that rock-and-roll combo ? ? Even in that he never solos like Jack on guitar or Rich on sax . He's -- he's just there , that's all '' . `` Yes , he's just there . He keeps the beat going . He likes to play bass because he doesn't have to solo . He doesn't like to rise and shine . Don't worry , Cady , he'll be back in the Beethoven fold by next year '' . Cady appeared slightly mollified . `` All right . But I refuse to be brutally honest and mention Chief Crazy Horse and his Five Colts '' . Anne laughed and Cady felt the tension loosen its grip on the back of his neck . `` Maybe I am padding it a bit , Anne '' , he said . `` But you know how hard it is to get a boy into a good college . He has to have leadership as well as grades '' . Anne folded the worrisome document . `` Did you know he is advertising his ham-radio equipment for sale this weekend ? ? He hasn't used it now for several years . Can you really say his motivation for college is electronics '' ? ? Cady felt the jolt as though he had stepped off the curb on his heel . `` And what would you say he wants to do ? ? Just what '' ? ? `` It's Dave who is applying to Hanford College . Why don't you ask him '' ? ? For once Cady Partlow wished Anne would yell at him so he could yell back . `` I have talked to him , but you know I've never tried to push him into any profession . I won't be guilty of trying to run his life '' . Anne picked up the towel she was hemming for the hospital guild . `` Just because your father tried to make a banker out of you , you've leaned over backward to keep your hands off . But subconsciously you've wanted him to conform to your mold . You want him to be a leader of men , like you '' . Cady put the well-worn chip back on his shoulder . `` Dave has qualities of leadership . He just hasn't developed them yet . Give him time '' . He never will , Cady . Not the kind of leadership you mean , working with lots of people . All your wishful thinking won't change that . Remember what you used to say in the Army ? ? You can't run a war with ninety-nine generals and one private '' ! ! Cady walked the block to the mailbox , almost ashamed of himself for arguing with Anne . Martin felt it was incredible that the situation had come to exist at all . And once begun , had grown to such monstrous proportions . The pair of white cotton shorts ruled his life . Lying awake at night , he could see them , laid out on the floor of his mind . When he rose in the morning , the image was still there . He had always been a messy and negligent man . In his bachelor days , his bedroom had been strewn with clothes which his mother , or later the hotel maid , generally saw fit to put in order . No doubt Dolores resented following in their footsteps . But it was fun those first days , kidding about the trail of garments he left littered across the rug . There was an assertive maleness in his grinning refusal to pick them up . Half slyly he enjoyed seeing her stoop to lift the things . He remembered the first time he saw her , standing across the room at a party . The smooth curve of her neck , very white against hair which curled against it like petals . Her hair was the color of those blooms which in seed catalogues are referred to as `` black '' , but since no flower is actually without color contain always a hint of grape or purple or blue -- he wanted to draw the broad patina of hair through his fingers , searching it slowly for a trace of veining which might reveal its true shade beneath the darkness . So he sought her out , and spoke to her , and thought of his hand in her hair . Or against her back , pressed on the column of vertebrae , which held her so magnificently straight and unyielding , until the segments of bone made tiny sharp cracking noises , like the snapped stem of a tulip . But , to put it bluntly , nothing snapped . Yet that had not seriously troubled him , not then . They married . More he could take at leisure . All Martin thought he needed was time : to what better use could time be put ? ? He saw later that they had made their marriage too quickly . There was too little occasion beforehand for resistance , the brave strong delights of emotional clash and meeting . They had left themselves too much to discover . But , at the start , his new life felt invigorating . Good . It was on the tenth day after the wedding ( how could it have been so soon ? ? ) that he dropped the shorts on the floor . `` Now , I'm not going to pick up those shorts '' ! ! Martin gave her a teasing pat . `` I think you'll get tired of them there '' . In the morning the shorts were where he had left them . He smiled to himself , and decided not to mention them till Dolores did . It was almost too easy . For he had just remembered : tonight they were having their first guests . The shorts would not be on the floor when he came home that evening . He was wrong . The rest of the bedroom had been groomed to a superhuman neatness , but in the middle of the carpet lay the disheveled shorts . They gave the room a strange note of incongruity , like a mole on a beautiful face . He saw that Dolores intended to wait until the last minute , thinking he would get nervous . Quietly he determined to foil her . I can be as stubborn as she can , he thought ; ; my nerves are as strong . She'll rush to the bedroom when the doorbell rings . It rang . Ten minutes early . Martin was standing a few feet from the front door . He swung around , eyes toward the bedroom , some fifteen feet away . Dolores stood motionless in the doorway . He could not cross the living room , brush past her , and bend down to retrieve the shorts . Martin turned his back . He strode to answer the bell . Bill's hat was deposited in the hall closet . With the most casual and relaxed manner in the world , Dolores led Anthea to the bedroom . Martin strained his ears . At first he could not be sure . Then he caught just enough to know that the shorts were still there . A glissade of giggles slid over their voices . All evening Anthea favored him with odd , coy looks . Clearly she had been instructed `` not to say a word '' . For some reason , this ellipsis in the conversation spread until it swallowed up every other topic . At last there was a void no one could fill . The Brainards went home early . Martin realized , later on , that he should have `` had it out '' with Dolores that night . As violently as possible . But he was so taken aback , he could not believe any rage of his would make her give in . On the contrary , it would only weaken his position if he fumed , while she stayed calm and adamant . And if he surrendered after raving at her . He shivered . Suppose he ran up the white flag altogether ? ? At once . He considered the sober possibility . In his head was the echo of those titters with Anthea . There was something about private feminine whisperings which always made him feel scabrous and unclean . He remembered his mother gossiping with her neighborhood women friends , lowering her voice to a penetrating hoarseness which might be trusted to carry to the head of the stairs , where he crouched listening . He could even recall the last time he sat there . She was talking about him that time , because he had done some bad thing , something she disliked , but `` Afterwards Martin said he was sorry . He apologized so sweetly , I couldn't keep being annoyed with him '' . It wasn't even true that he'd said he was sorry that time ; ; he had in fact said simply that he wished the thing hadn't happened , which was as honest as he could put it . But his mother told the story over and over , till her `` Martin said he was sorry '' was as much a part of her as the shape of her thin , pallid ears . The battle had to be fought . Let the best sex win . But his resolution hardly seemed to help . If the situation had been bad , it now got worse . About this time people began `` dropping in '' , considering that the newly married had been left alone long enough . Angrily Martin wished they had delayed the wedding and gone on a trip -- preferably one that lasted months -- instead of deciding not to postpone the date until he could get away . Here they were at the mercy of anyone who chose to come by . These stray people nearly always insisted on Dolores showing them around the apartment . Of course , the tours of inspection included the ever-present shorts . It was curious how the different visitors took this . Some tried to ignore the blot on the bedroom's countenance . Others asked . Quite a few laughed . To them all Dolores told a lighthearted and witty tale . `` It's a little contest Martin and I have '' , she would begin gaily , carrying the anecdote through a frothy and deceptive course . While he waited in the living room . Once Martin went along . They entered the bedroom , and Dolores said nothing . Then one of the guests showed his merriment . `` You were in a hurry , weren't you '' ? ? Martin would have liked to break the man's neck . Dolores smiled ; ; she let the interpretation stand . Now Martin heard himself give a snort of mock good nature . With her eyes Dolores dared him for the truth , ready to begin : It's a little contest -- Never again did he enter into the ritual of showing the apartment . They kept up a rigid pretense of speaking relations . But Martin seldom felt the impulse to talk about anything . What to talk about ? ? Dolores kept picking up any of his clothes ( except the fatal shorts ) which he left about , but he had been robbed of pleasure in scattering his possessions . He fell into the habit of putting his clothes in drawers and closets , so his life might impinge as little as possible on hers . The shorts alone remained . In his moments of worst agony , Martin imagined what his friends were saying . The sound of their amazement . Bizarre : He could hear the word . The most bizarre situation . We were up to visit them and He had thought her exactly what he wanted . Six weeks of marriage and I'm using the past tense , he told himself furiously . Pursuing his idea , he saw that it would be impossible to leave her now . Everyone would know why ; ; he would cut a supremely ridiculous figure . He was trapped . Day and night Martin could not drag his mind from the dilemma he had made for himself . His mind scurried frantically , seeking an exit . Alternately he had periods of hostile defeatism in which he determined sullenly , morosely , to live out his life in this fashion . Nothing would change , nothing would ever change . When the solution finally came to him , one night while he was in bed , he was so shaken by its simplicity that he could only wonder why it had not occurred to him before . In a frenzy of excitement , he considered his plan . Beside his shorts , he would place something of hers . Instantaneously he would have won an immeasurable moral victory , for if she picked up , say , a pair of her panties , she might just as well lift his shorts lying alongside -- the expenditure of energy was almost the same . He felt that it would be a particular humiliation to Dolores to pick up her own underwear which he had laid on the floor . Furthermore , he could go on repeating the maneuver endlessly : every time he went in the bedroom , he could drop a slip or a brassiere , or maybe a girdle , next to his shorts . Sooner or later , Dolores would crack . On the other hand , if she didn't remove her own things , it would be difficult to explain to the parade of guests which traversed the apartment . Martin guessed that Dolores would not be so eager to tell the next installment of her story . The tale , he thought , would become less gay . She had used his rumpled shorts as the very image of his childishness , his lack of control , his general male looseness , while she remained cool , airy , and untouched , the charming teacher who disciplined an unruly body . To have her underclothes linked with his on the floor would draw her visibly into a struggle both bitter and absurd . Something in the back of his mind was aware that the magnificence of the plan lay in his faith , that the idea would work because he believed in it , since his courage and virility were involved , because it was truly his . The knowledge kept him from analyzing his scheme to death , and took him through the last hours of that night in a peace of exalted fanaticism . The next morning , while Dolores was out of the room , he went to her bureau drawer , took out a pair of nylon lace pants , and tenderly dropped them next to his shorts . He sat down on the bed . In a surprisingly short time , Dolores appeared . To his delight , her eyes focused at once upon the two garments . Slowly and deliberately she reached down and touched the lace with her fingers , then hesitated for about a second . Ah , he thought , she's going through the chain of reasoning which says she might really just as well pick up my shorts too . He saw that in a moment she had grasped all the implications of a plot which had been weeks in occurring to him . Extending her fingers another inch , she caught up the shorts , and swiftly left the room . She did not look at him , but he noticed that her face was flushed and her eyes unsteady . They breakfasted together , but Martin did not refer to his triumph , and Dolores found a great deal to do in the kitchen , bobbing up and down from the table so that talk was impossible . Well , Martin thought , That'll save . He left for work in high spirits . As he relaxed that day , Martin realized how tense he had been these past weeks . He found that he no longer hated Dolores ( he knew how much he had hated her ) , and he was surprised at a resurgence of an affectionate feeling . `` Good old A-Z '' , Cap said . `` You know , I've got one of your cars at home . As a prominent industrialist , you ought to be interested in his nibs' support group . Isn't his racket down your alley '' ? ? Once it was , William thought . But not any more . A rush of memory swept him back , and he forgot Cap . How did he start on such a ride to brief glory ? ? Simply enough , through the inadvertent agency of his brother-in-law . General Hershey's draft and Doc Eddyman and Cap were responsible for his first eminence , but Fearless Freddy Bryan could take credit , if he cared to ( and he did ) , for the second time . Freddy needed a job , having been detached from a rather dangerous career in real estate and skyscraper financing by Gerry , and it was up to Arthur Willis to provide him with one . Mr. Willis bought Zenith Plastic Products , a skeleton corporation of sorts which had undergone many vicissitudes and whose principal assets were a couple of electronics plants on Long Island engaged in working out government contracts , and installed Freddy in an executive position . Shortly after , Freddy had his usual proliferation of bold ideas . Willis listened patiently , and once in a while William was exposed to them at a family gathering ; ; he generally heard Freddy's suggestions without interest , being absorbed by his own prospering concerns . Probably Mr. Willis was influenced toward deeper involvement by familial loyalty and a concern for his grandchildren . Gerry began to aid Freddy with her father , prodded , no doubt , by Joan's open contempt for Freddy and William's irritating competency . Another factor must have been the eventual disposal of Willis' fortune ; ; she unquestionably assumed that the more he was entwined with Freddy , the more likely he was to reward Freddy richly upon his death . Whatever the reasons , Willis and Bryan started expanding Zenith . They acquired another electronics factory , a specialized ceramics company , an organization that built -- very experimentally -- high-speed research calculators . Since they were hunting for national defense contracts , Adam Herberet , a man of surprising resources , entered the combination as a silent partner because of his political connections . Feeling his power , Freddy looked for additional worlds to conquer . Heavy industry , slanted toward inexhaustible government coffers , attracted him . The Allstates Auto Company , a medium-sized firm which manufactured four-wheel-drive vehicles and other off-road equipment , had recently constructed an over-large , modern plant in a burst of misguided optimism . Cursed with a shaky management and dissatisfied stockholders , it was ripe for amalgamation , and Freddy's instinct was to keep growing by stock mergers and small expenditure of cash , and never mind inevitable consequences . With Herberet's blessing , he was convinced that Allstates' Wisconsin folly would be ideal for conversion to airplane sub-assembly , tanks , missiles or ordnance of some kind . At that point William came into the picture . Although not much desiring the account , he had been appointed advertising head of Zenith . Freed of routine by having his own firm and a complaisant partner , his work in New York had given him a broader overall knowledge of business administration and corporate structure ; ; and if he wasn't entirely committed to what he did , he was at least fascinated by the chance of wider opportunities . Mr. Willis , eager to have him allied with the family , wanted advice beyond the confines of his field , and William set out on a serious study of the situation , including trips to Wisconsin and Washington . In the end , he said : `` I'm not enchanted by the proposition , sir . I know a guy named Jack Hamrick , a very bright young engineer who was with Chrysler , and I took him with me to Allstates . It's his expert opinion that the plant isn't well suited to what you have in mind . The conversion will cost a fortune . Besides that , I'm acquainted more or less with the defense hardware situation through my contacts in the Air Force . I think Adam Herberet is guilty of being too hopeful and better informed on defense financing than on the technical side . Missiles have thrown everything up for grabs , and nobody seems to be sure where we go from here . The future of manned aircraft is in doubt , which affects government procurement , and jet transports have revolutionized the airline trade -- one jet can take the place of three compound-engine planes . This means the aircraft companies are going to tear into the government market , looking for anything they can get and making the competition tough . Here are a few facts and figures I've assembled . Can't you stay with what you have and wait till the dust settles '' ? ? Willis glanced at the bound pages given him and shrugged . `` Well '' , he said , `` there is Freddy , you know . And Gerry . Freddy is deeply committed to our plans already . He assures me he has people to handle the money raising , and Ham Richert , my lawyer , says the legal aspects of the wedding of Zenith and Allstates are no problem . I don't like to exhibit the deadly dampening effect of an elderly man's caution '' . `` Yes , I appreciate that . I wish you wouldn't tell Freddy I'm lukewarm ; ; I've caused him trouble before , and he's beginning to resent me . If we don't take care , the sisters will be entering the fray on opposite sides , brandishing their cudgels '' . `` Which is a frightful prospect , Bill '' . Willis laughed . `` One shouldn't mix commercial affairs with patriarchy , but in this case I have no choice . Let me think about it . I'm most grateful to you , so grateful I wish you were my principal aide instead of Freddy '' . Not to William's surprise , Freddy , Adam and Hamilton Richert prevailed ; ; allied to them was Gerry , devoting much time to swaying her father , and Joan dismissed all thought of the project and William was unwilling to interfere further . Zenith absorbed Allstates , stock transfers were arranged , and Freddy became president of the hyphenated combination . Through Jack Hamrick , William fell into the world of automobile promotion and got several accounts for Shoals and Clay . He forgot about A-Z till , unhappily , he and Hamrick were proved correct . Freddy's backing dropped away from him and Mr. Willis was forced to make up the deficit . Adam , beset by changing defense conditions and the open secret that he was part of the new corporation , couldn't deliver from his end . The Wisconsin plant turned out to be a white elephant . Stock Willis held in abundance fell sharply in value . Confronted by a grim future , Freddy lost his nerve and plumped for a drastic liquidation . Once more Willis summoned William . `` You were right '' , he said -- `` you and your engineer -- and I'm in something of a bind . Freddy's solution doesn't appeal to me . In addition to other defects , I'm a stubborn man and hate to admit to the common garden variety of bad judgment . Will you see if you can help me '' ? ? William spent a long week end closeted with Hamrick . His recent experience in motor car advertising , a love for cars of themselves , the existence of A-Z's useless Wisconsin set-up , exposure to exciting conceptions of Hamrick's that nobody would buy , and the coincidental recent failure of a respected but out-dated small-car manufacturer called Ticonderoga Motors had given him an idea of such dimensions he was almost afraid to broach it . Initially , Hamrick's reaction to A-Z going into the passenger car market was discouraging . He thought the financing , the advertising , the production of new models , the founding of a nationwide chain of dealerships was simply too difficult . Then he caught fire . If A-Z could buy Ticonderoga cheaply and use their presses and dies and other equipment , if William could hit precisely the right promotion note , if the money hurdle was not insurmountable . They took nearly a month to investigate , marshal statistics , and put their arguments down in black and white . Taking Hamrick with him , William went to Mr. Willis . He was surprised and dubious , but impressed by the engineer and the report . `` Your alternative is breathtaking '' , he said , `` and , I'm frank in saying , a bit mad . I wish I was younger and less timid . Well , I can't resolve this myself . I'll have to call in the brain trust . Are you willing to run the gantlet ? ? I can't guarantee you a sympathetic audience '' . `` We'll be in there swinging '' , William said , `` but in a way , sir , you've got to decide it yourself . You have the controlling interest and the principal expenditure is yours -- and , besides , nobody else is going to have the courage . If they follow anyone , it'll have to be you '' . He paused . `` I should explain : there's more here for me than advocating my little dream , there's you . You mustn't take a fall , or publicly back away . I hate that . You're -- you're Arthur Willis . Forgive the hearts and flowers theme '' . `` I rather like the music '' , Willis replied quietly . `` Thank you '' . At the meeting , attended by Freddy , Richert , Herberet and the A-Z executive staff , with Mr. Willis presiding , William and Hamrick did indeed run the gantlet . From shock and incredulity , most of the listeners went on to open resistance and animosity . `` Oh , my God '' , Ham Richert said , `` a little child shall lead them . Move over , General Motors '' . `` It's absurd , Bill '' , Freddy said , from a pale face . `` You're leading Dad down the garden path '' . `` Your garden , God damn it '' ! ! William said . `` I don't enjoy family quarrels '' , Adam said . `` Nor crazy relatives . We're here to transact business . Can't we put an end to this , Arthur '' ? ? `` Hear me out , please '' , William begged . `` I'm an advertising hustler , I admit , but I have to get hot once in a larger sphere . Sure , Ticonderoga went broke in the low-priced market bucking the Big Three . Their cars weren't small enough , they didn't have the power , they were old-fashioned . They tried to sell 'em on economy and simple merit . We've arrived at an age for romance and snobbery . We've all been rich and spoiled long enough to hate the machine age . Look what those little European jobs are doing . We'll woo the consumer with a product , not bludgeon him with chromed excess length and weight . Let's make it moonlight and the call of far places and a seduction , at reasonable rates . Ticonderoga folded a few minutes too soon , before the tide changed , still honest and stupid -- and the network of dealers the company had is around waiting to be signed up again -- waiting for us , ready-made . We've got rid of the steam yachts and Georgian houses , and the bloated , too-expensive automobile is next . Why not come down smartly in the world , in a chic fashion , with an Allstates-Zenith '' ? ? He swayed them somewhat , but the debate raged on . Financing emerged as the main obstacle . Mr. Willis made it evident that he had contributed his maximum . `` Nobody will underwrite it , I'm telling you '' , Freddy said . `` I know what I'm talking about in that department '' . `` There's plenty of risk money '' , Ham Richert added , `` but not for anything this risky '' . `` All right '' , William said . `` We'll try to swing the deal on that basis . If we can't raise the capital , we're through . Nothing has been lost . You're up against it anyhow . Why won't you give me a chance '' ? ? A silence fell . Heads instinctively turned in Willis' direction . He smiled at William and slowly rubbed his hands together . `` I feel I must answer the question '' , he said , `` since the onus later , if any , should fall on me -- I don't relish recriminations spread broadcast outside my family . I'm not giving you a chance , Bill , but availing myself of your generous offer of assistance . Good luck to you '' . `` All the in-laws have got to have their day '' , Adam said , and glared at William and Freddy in turn . Sweat started out on William's forehead , whether from relief or disquietude he could not tell . Across the table , Hamrick saluted him jubilantly with an encircled thumb and forefinger . Nobody else showed pleasure . Spike-haired , burly , red-faced , decked with horn-rimmed glasses and an Ivy League suit , Jack Hamrick awaited William at the officers' club . `` Hello , boss '' , he said , and grinned . `` I suppose I can never expect to call you ' General ' after that Washington episode '' . `` I'm afraid not '' . It was among these that Hinkle identified a photograph of Barco ! ! For it seems that Barco , fancying himself a ladies' man ( and why not , after seven marriages ? ? ) , had listed himself for Mormon Beard roles at the instigation of his fourth murder victim who had said : `` With your beard , dear , you ought to be in movies '' ! ! Mills secured Barco's photograph from the gentleman in charge , rushed to the Hollywood police station to report the theft , and less than five minutes later , detectives with his picture in hand were on the trail of Cal Barco . On their way , they stopped at every gas station along the main boulevards to question the attendants . Finally , at Ye Olde Gasse Filling Station on Avocado Avenue , they learned that their man , having paused to get oil for his car , had asked about the route to San Diego . They headed in that direction and , at San Juan Capistrano By-the-Sea came upon Barco sitting in the quaint old Spanish Mission Drive-in , eating a hot tamale . At the moment , Barco's back was to the road so he didn't see the detectives close in on his convertible which , in their quest for the stolen lap rug , they proceeded to search . The robe , however , was missing , for by that time Barco had disposed of it at a pawnshop in Glendale . The detectives placed Barco under arrest and , without informing him of the nature of the charge , took him back to Hollywood for questioning . Thus it was that Barco , apprehended for mere larceny , now began to suspect that one or another of his murders had been uncovered . During the return trip , Barco kept muttering to himself in meaningless phrases , such as : `` They're under sand dunes They're better off , I tell you I saved their souls '' . The detective , commenting on Barco's behavior , felt that he merely belonged among the myriad citizens of our community who are mentally unhinged -- that he was a more or less harmless `` nut '' ! ! However while in his cell awaiting trial for theft , Barco , in a fit of apprehension , made an attempt to take his own life . The attempt had failed because , when endeavoring to cut his wrists , this murderer of seven women had fainted at the sight of blood . The jail authorities -- attaching no particular significance to the episode -- offered Barco whisky to revive him ; ; but the old fellow , a lifelong teetotaler , refused it , and no more was thought of the matter . Then it was that District Attorney Welch entered the case . A man of vaulting ambition , with one eye on the mayorship of Los Angeles , nothing ever escaped him which might possibly lead to personal publicity . It was reported to Welch's office that a thief in the city jail had attempted suicide . Welch wanted to know why . No one knew . Now Welch had a pet theory that everyone is guilty of breaking more laws than he ever gets caught at . The suicide attempt looked to him like an opportunity to put his theory to the test . So he paid a call on Barco in his cell and began their chat by stating bluntly : `` Barco , we've got the goods on you ! ! It'll be a lot better if you come clean '' . At first Barco was evasive and shifty . But with Welch's relentless pursuit of the subject , Barco finally `` broke '' and started confessing to one murder after another . By the time Barco reached the count of three , the situation seemed to Welch almost too good to be true . But if true , it was the case of which he had dreamed , the case which would throw him into headlines all over America as the hero of a great murder trial . Welch summoned jail officials to Barco's cell . But to Welch's chagrin , the police captain pooh-poohed Welch's credulity in Barco's confession . Barco was clearly a `` nut '' . It required strength , bravado , daring to commit murder . `` That worm a murderer ? ? Ridiculous '' ! ! Then , for the first time since his arrest , a glint of spirit lit Barco's eyes . His manhood had been attacked . He stiffened and rose to his feet . He'd show them ! ! `` Is that so '' ? ? He queried . `` Well , for ten years I've been murdering women . I can lead you to every one of the bodies , and there ain't four , nor five , nor six of 'em -- there's seven ! ! '' The next day the police captain , in derision , organized what he termed `` Welch's Wild Goose Chase '' . For indeed it seemed incredible that anyone could go on committing murder for ten years and not get caught at it , even in Hollywood . The searching party consisted of the police captain , Welch , Barco , policemen with shovels , newspaper reporters , and cameramen . Barco , his state of apprehension gone , never to return , had assumed a matter-of-factness which remained his principal attitude from that time on . He directed the cortege of autos to the sand dunes near Santa Monica . Stopping the cars at a fork in the road , he got out , paced off a certain distance to a spot between two shrub-covered sand hills , and indicated a location . Orders were given to dig . Nothing was found . Welch was worried . The police captain chortled . The newspaper boys cracked jokes and again Barco's pride was aroused . With greater precision he again paced off a location , this time a little more to the left . With quibs and gibes , the policemen again started digging . Welch was on edge . The captain was remarking that it was a nice day for a picnic when finally one of the shovels struck an object . `` There's something here '' ! ! Said the digger . Joking stopped and everyone gathered around . The digger , thrusting about with his shovel , now raised into view a package crudely wrapped in one of the murderer's Hollywood sport shirts . Although it was a mere fragment of the victim's remains , it was enough . Welch was wild with delight . His elation grew as Barco's seven disclosures brought to light one reward after another . Now did Welch truly become the man of the hour , and everything that followed in the procedure of Justice was a new triumph for him . It went to his head , and his ambition increased . It was apparent that Welch was in cahoots with Marshall and would use his power as D.A. to drag every possible sensation into the case . Every new scandal which would provide more `` copy '' for Marshall's pen would thus mean more publicity for Welch . I knew that both these cynics were waiting with impatience for the dramatic moment when Viola was called to the stand . Once there , the D.A. with devilish cleverness would provide Marshall with headlines : `` Viola's Multiple Romances '' `` Viola Lake an Addict '' `` Downfall of Another Film Idol '' ! ! It would be fine publicity for the man who was willing to walk to the mayor's throne over the broken reputation of a helpless girl ! ! I studied Welch closely as the trial progressed for any hint which might give me a lead as to how he might be thwarted . It wasn't long before I sensed that there was something deeper than overvaulting ambition back of his desire for Viola's destruction . He was bitter and resentful toward her , personally resentful . A dreadful fear entered my consciousness that perhaps he had entertained aspirations toward Viola's favors -- or , even more serious perhaps , that he had attained a share of them and had then been superseded by some luckier chap . I did not rest until I had tracked the mystery down . Well , here it is . One day over a year before , there had been a cocktail party in an apartment of a downtown hotel . Viola had been urged to attend , by telephone , and not knowing the host or the character of the party , she had gone . She arrived late and as she entered the party , noted that gentlemen seemed to be in the majority ; ; the air was thick with smoke , empty bottles were in evidence , and several of the guests were somewhat the worse for liquor . Naturally , Viola had no wish to remain , but she felt she couldn't leave so soon after her arrival , in all politeness to her host . And it so happened that adjacent to a couch on which she had taken refuge was a small table on which she noted a vase of red rosebuds ; ; while projecting from beneath the couch were a pair of feet which , as Fate would have it , belonged to District Attorney Welch . As Viola sat there , a playful impulse overcame her to remove the shoes and socks from the unidentified feet and , as a prank , insert rosebuds between the toes . A little later the district attorney woke up , emerged from under the couch , looked at his watch , and realized he had an engagement that very hour to address a meeting of the Culture Forum on `` The Civic Spirit of the Southland '' , in the Byzantine room of the hotel where his wife , as president of the forum , was to preside . He made his way to his host's bedroom where he carefully brushed himself off , neatly arranged his hair , and painstakingly selected his hat from the many on the bed . Then , noting neither the absence of his footwear nor the presence of the rosebuds , he made his way to the Byzantine room and , with his usual dignity , mounted the rostrum . The effect on the intellectuals among his audience may well be imagined . The incident , aside from reflecting on Welch's political career , had all but wrecked his home life . He never rested until he discovered who the culprit was , and when he did , he vowed vengeance on Viola Lake if ever the chance came his way . And here it was ! ! By such innocent actions are human tragedies sometimes set in motion . During these first days of the trial I didn't have as much time to commiserate with Viola as I should have liked . In the first place , it was difficult for us to meet . We couldn't be seen together , for the tongue of Scandal was ever ready to link our names , and the tongue of Scandal finds but one thing to say of the association of a man with a girl , no matter how innocent . I couldn't invite Viola to our house , for Mother snobbishly refused to receive her . Now the Czarship had not affected my own sense of social values , but Mother had attained a reflected glory through it , which had opened the doors of Los Angeles-Pasadena Society to her . There , Mother was received by the scions of aristocratic lines which are dominated by the Budweisers ( of beer derivation ) , the Chalmers ( of underwear origin ) , and the Heinzes ( whose forbears founded a nationally famous trade in pickles ) . I hated being dragged into the salons of these aristocrats . But Mother insisted , for it is seldom indeed that anyone remotely connected with the cinema is ever received in their exclusive midsts . In fact , it was not until the King of Spain had visited at Pickfair that Mary and Doug were beckoned to cross the sacred barriers which separate Los Angeles and Pasadena from the hoi-polloi . Mother even went so far as to trump up for me matrimonial opportunities with Pasadena debs who had been educated abroad , and with those of the more lenient Los Angeles area where a debutante was a girl who had been to high school . But at long last came a time when I broke away from Mother and her society `` chi-chi '' in order to spend a cosy evening with Viola and her chaperon at her home . However , such a hotbed of gossip had grown up during the trial , that every precaution had to be taken to keep my visit from being whispered to the world , Society , and even , alas , to my own mother . When I arrived at Viola's I was shown , to my surprise , into the kitchen . Viola greeted me , in checked apron , ladle in hand , and explained it was the cook's night out and that she herself was preparing dinner . I sat and watched proceedings . There was to be roast chicken with dressing , giblet gravy , asparagus , new peas with a sprig of mint , creamed onions , and mashed potatoes -- all chosen , prepared , and cooked by Viola herself . I realized that Hamlet was faced with an entirely different problem , but his agony could have been no greater . The most that was accomplished was adding Mrs. Beige's tray to the dish pile , and by means of repeated threats , on an ascending scale , seeing that the girls dressed themselves , after a fashion . I was saved from making the decision as the phone rang , and the girls were upon me instantly . Here's a household hint : if you can't find your children , and get tired of calling them , pick up the phone . No matter if your children are at the movies , in school , visiting their grandmother , or on a field trip in some distant city , they will be upon you magically within seconds after you pick up the phone . Jennie and Miranda twined themselves around me , murmuring endearments . Louise climbed onto a stool and clutched the hand with which I was trying to hold the phone , claiming my immediate attention on grounds of extreme emergency . Somehow managing to get out a cool , poised , `` Won't you hold on a second , please '' , I covered up the mouthpiece , and with more warmth and less poise , gave a quick lecture on crime and punishment , mostly the latter , including Devil's Island and the remoter reaches of Siberia . I promised to illustrate the lecture , if they so much as breathed till after the call was completed . Speaking into the phone again and recognizing the caller , I resumed my everyday voice . Soon we were deep in a conversation that was interrupted many times by little things like Jennie's holding her breath and pretending to black out , Miranda's dumping the contents of the sugar bowl on the table , and various screeches , thuds , and giggles . Under the circumstances , I had difficulty keeping up with the conversation on the phone , but when I hung up I was reasonably certain that Francesca had wanted to remind me of our town meeting the next evening , and how important it was that Hank and I be there . I discovered that the girls had shrewdly vacated the kitchen , and were playing quietly in the living room . It seemed that I would be the gainer if I accepted the peace and quiet , instead of carrying out my threats . Resolving to get something done , I started in on the dishes . No . I'm not saying it right . What I meant to say was that I started to start in on the dishes by gathering them all together in the kitchen sink . They looked so formidable , however , so demanding , that I found myself staring at them in dismay and starting to woolgather again , this time about Francesca and her husband . How about them , I thought . Francesca and Herbert were among the few people we knew in Catatonia . We didn't even know them till about a month after we moved -- at that time , they had called on us , after I met Fran at a PTA meeting , and had taken us in hand socially . They had been kind to us and we were indebted to them for one or two pleasant dinners , and for information as to where to shop , which dentist , doctor , plumber , and sitter to call ( not that there was much of a choice , since Catatonia was just a village ; ; the yellow pages of the telephone book were amazingly thin ) . They were `` personalities '' . Herb , an expert on narrow ties , thin lapels , and swatches , was men's fashion editor of Parvenu , the weekly magazine with the tremendous circulation . Fran and he had met about two years after she had arrived in Manhattan from Nebraska , or was it Wyoming ? ? She was the daughter and sole heiress of either a cattle baron or an oil millionaire and , having arrived in New York with a big bank roll , became a dabbler in various fields . She patronized Greenwich Village artists for awhile , then put some money into a Broadway show which was successful ( terrible , but successful ) . It was during her `` writing '' period that she and Herb met and decided that they were in love . They were married at a lavish ceremony which was duly recorded in Parvenu and all other magazines and newspapers , and then they honeymooned in Bermuda . No , not Bermuda . Bermuda was not in style that year . They had honeymooned in Rome ; ; everyone was very high on Rome that year . They had bought their house in Catatonia after investigating all the regions of suburbia surrounding New York ; ; they had chosen Catatonia because of its reputation for excellent schools , beaches , and abundance of names . `` You are bound to get involved with people when you have children '' , Fran had told me at our first meeting , `` so it is good to know that those with whom you get involved are not just dreary little housewives and dull husbands , but People Who Do Things '' . I admired their easy way of doing things but I couldn't escape an uneasiness at their way of always doing the right things . Their house was a centuries-old Colonial which they had had restored ( guided by an eminent architect ) and updated , and added on to . It had a gourmet's corner ( instead of a kitchen ) , a breakfast room , a luncheon room , a dining room , a sitting room , a room for standing up , a party room , dressing rooms for everybody , even a room for mud . It was all set up so there would be no dust anywhere and so that their children would color in the coloring room , paint in the painting room , play with blocks in the block house , and do all the other things in the proper rooms at exactly the right time . Their two boys were `` well adjusted '' and , like their parents , always did the right thing at the right time and damn the consequences . Francesca and Herbert considered themselves violently nonconformist and showed the world they were by filling their Colonial house with contemporary furniture and paintings and other art objects ( expensive , but not necessarily valuable , contemporary things ) . Fran flaunted her independence by rebelling against the Catatonia uniform of Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks by wearing Bermuda shorts and knee-length socks in colors ; ; bright pinks and plaids and vivid stripes . Sometimes she even wore the uniform in solid , unrelieved black , and with her blonde hair cut so closely , wearing this uniform , she strongly resembled a member of the SS. . No one could dislike them , I thought . Sometimes , though , they did not seem quite human . It seemed , indeed , that their house was not so much a home , but rather a perfect stage set , and that they were actors who had been handed fat roles in a successful play , and had talent enough to fill the roles competently , with nice understatement . Practically the only enthusiasm they showed was when they were discussing `` names '' ; ; even brand names . You should hear the reverence in Fran's voice when she said `` Baccarat '' or `` Steuben '' or `` Madame Alexander '' . She always let it be known that there was wine in the pot roast or that the chicken had been marinated in brandy , and that Koussevitzky's second cousin was an intimate of theirs . I wouldn't have wasted time puzzling over this couple were it not for my fear that all the other inhabitants of Catatonia were equally unreal . I couldn't feel at home among them . Besides Francesca , there was Blanche . Francesca was pleasant and charming , but Blanche was sweet . Yes , Blanche was very , very sweet -- being in her company was like being drowned in warm , melted marshmallows . I had once been a witness when Blanche had smiled and said with only minimum ruefulness , `` Oh , my souffle has collapsed '' . Anyone knows how a real , red-blooded woman would react to such a catastrophe ! ! If Blanche had been honest , she would have yelled , slammed at least a couple of doors , and thrown a few little , valueless things . But dear me , no ; ; not Blanche . After five minutes with Blanche , one might welcome the astringency of Grazie , who was a sort of Gwen Cafritz to Francesca's Perle Mesta . Francesca and Grazie were habitual committee chairmen and they usually managed to be elected co-chairmen , equal bosses , of whatever PTA or civic project was being launched . They were inseparable , not because they were fond of each other , but because they wanted to keep an eye on each other , as they were keen rivals for social leadership . Grazie was mean : quietly mean , and bitterly , unfunnily sarcastic . She it was who had looked to see if I was wearing shoes upon learning that I couldn't drive . Grazie had a small , slick head and her hair and skin were the color of golden toast . She lived in an ultra-modern house whose decoration , appointments , paint , and even pets were chosen to complement her coloring ; ; the pets were a couple of Siamese cats . Her uniform was of rich , raw silk , in a shade which matched her hair , skin , housepaint , and cats , and since she was so thin as to be almost shapeless , she rather resembled a frozen fish stick . The husbands of these women and others I had met in Catatonia were distinguished only in that they were , to me at least , indistinguishable . I couldn't tell one from the other . Like Herbert , they were all in communications : radio , television , magazines , and advertising . One or two were writers of books ; ; all were fellows of finite charm . Each had developed a hair-trigger chuckle and the habit of saying `` zounds '' ! ! In deference to country-squirehood . I never thought I'd live to hear people chuckle and say `` zounds '' ! ! In real life . I wouldn't have missed it for anything . They were `` sincere '' -- men of the too-hearty handclasp and the urgent smile . These boys acknowledged an introduction to anybody by gently pressing one of his hands in both of theirs , while they gazed , misty-eyed with care , into the eyes of the person they were meeting . Could such unadulterated love , for a total stranger , be credited ? ? They were always leaping to light cigarettes , open car doors , fill plates or glasses , and I mistrusted the whole lot of them to the same degree that I mistrusted bake shops that called themselves `` Sanitary Bake Shops '' . `` O ! ! Pioneers ! ! '' I thought , and wondered what kind of homesteads such odd pioneers would establish in this suburban frontier ; ; pioneers who looked like off-duty gardeners even at parent-teacher conferences and who never called the school principal `` Mister '' . I sighed , thinking that among other things , people here seemed to be those who would have to cut down if they earned less than $85,000 yearly ; ; people who would give their teeth for a chance to get on `` Person to Person '' ; ; people who thought it was nice to be important , but not important to be nice ; ; who were more ingratiating than gracious , more personalities than persons . In my estimation , they were people who read Daphne du Maurier , and discussed Kafka ; ; well , not discussed him exactly , but said , `` Kafka '' ! ! Reverently and raised their eyes , as if they were at a loss to describe how they felt about Kafka , which they were , because they had no opinions about Kafka , not having read Kafka . They were , I felt , people invariably trying to prove not who , but what they were , and trying to determine what , not who , others were . Becoming aware that it was nearly lunchtime , I brought myself back to the tasks at hand . I made plans for the afternoon -- doing the breakfast and luncheon dishes all at once , making the beds , and then maybe painting the kitchen . Then , I remembered that the girls had had a banana for dessert every day for the last week . `` Bananas '' ! ! Jennie had shouted each time . `` They're not dessert ! ! They're not even food . They're just something you're supposed to put on cereal for breakfast '' . I dug around and found a mix , and was able to surprise them with a devil's-food cake with chocolate icing . ( Sometimes I think you need only one rule for cooking : if you can't put garlic in it , put chocolate in it . ) The cake was received in a stunned silence that was evidence in itself of the dearth of taste thrills Mama had been providing . Then Jennie closed her eyes , stretched forth her arms , and said : `` Take my hand , Louise ; ; I'm a stranger in paradise '' . Needless to say , I was furious at this unparalleled intrusion upon free enterprise . How dared they demand to `` snoop '' in private financial records , disbursements , confidential contracts and agreements ? ? `` It is as though '' , I said on the historic three-hour , coast-to-coast radio broadcast which I bought ( following Father Coughlin and pre-empting the Eddie Cantor , Manhattan Merry-go-round and Major Bowes shows ) `` That Man in the White House , like some despot of yore , insisted on reading my diary , raiding my larder and ransacking my lingerie ! ! '' My impassioned plea for civil rights created a landslide of correspondence and one sponsor even asked me to consider replacing the Eddie Cantor comedy hour on a permanent basis . But what quarter could a poor defenseless woman expect from a dictator who would even make so bold as to close all of the banks in our great nation ? ? The savage barbarian hordes of red Russian Communism descended on the Athens that was mighty Metronome , sacking and despoiling with their Bolshevistic battle cry of `` Soak the rich ' ! ! After an unspeakable siege , lasting the better part of two months , it was announced that the studio `` owed '' the government a tax debt in excess of eight million dollars while I , who had always remained aloof from such iniquitous practices as paying taxes on the salary I had earned and the little I legally inherited as Morris' helpless relict , was `` stung '' with a personal bill of such astronomical proportions as to `` wipe out '' all but a fraction of my poor , hard-come-by savings . I was also publicly reprimanded , dragged through the mud by the radical press and made a figure of fun by such leftist publications as The New Republic , The New Yorker , Time and The Christian Science Monitor . It was then that I availed myself of the rights of a citizen and declared the income tax unconstitutional . The litigation was costly and seemingly endless . I fought like a tigress but by the time I appealed my case to the Supreme Court ( 1937 ) , Mr. Roosevelt and his `` henchmen '' had done their `` dirty work '' all too well , even going so far as to attempt to `` pack '' the highest tribunal in the land in order to defeat little me . Presidential coercion had succeeded not only in poisoning the courtiers , `` toadies '' and sycophants of the `` bench '' against me , but it had been so far-reaching as to discourage any lawyer in the nation from representing me ! ! I was ready , like Portia , to present my own brief . But the Supreme Court wouldn't even hear my case ! ! My plea was unanimously voted down and `` thrown out '' . Again , my name was on all the front pages . I was , it seemed , persona non grata in every quarter , but not entirely without a staunch following of noted political thinkers and students of jurisprudence . As Charles Evans Hughes said , `` Miss Poitrine's limitations as an actress are exceeded only by her logic as a litigant '' . Albert Einstein was quoted as saying : `` The workings of the woman's mind amaze me '' . Henry Ford spoke of me as `` utterly astounding '' . Heywood Broun wrote : `` Belle Poitrine is the most original thinker since Caligula '' , and even F.D.R. had to concede that `` if the rest of this nation showed the foresight and patriotism of Miss Poitrine , America would rapidly resemble ancient Babylon and Nineveh '' . Not only were the court costs prohibitive , but I was subjected to crippling fines , in addition to usurious interest on the unpaid `` debts '' which the government claimed that Metronome and I owed -- a severe financial blow . Nor , as Manny said , had the notoriety done my career `` any good '' . My enemies were only too anxious to level against me such charges as `` reactionary '' , `` robber baroness '' , and even `` traitor '' ! ! Traitor indeed ! ! I point now with pride to the fact that , long ere the Committee on Un-American Activities , the Minute Women , the Economic Council and other such notable `` watchdog '' organizations were so much as heard of , I was Hollywood's leading bulwark against communism , fighting single-handedly `` creeping socialism '' against such insuperable odds as the Fascio-Communist troops of the NRA , PWA , WPA , CCC and an army of more than twenty-two million mercenaries whom F.D.R. employed secretly , through the transparent ruse of regular `` relief '' checks . Needless to say , my art suffered drastically during this turbulent period . Could it do otherwise ? ? Even though I have always had a genius for `` throwing myself '' into every role and `` playing it for all it's worth '' , no actress can be expected to do her best work when her fortune , her reputation , her livelihood , her home and her nation itself are all imperilled . Such sweeping distractions are hardly conducive to `` Oscar '' winning performances . I tried my hardest , with little help , may I say , from my husband and leading man , but somehow the outside pressures were too severe . Having ( through my unflagging effort and devotion ) achieved stardom , a fortune and a world-renowned wife at an age when most young men are casting their first vote , Letch proceeded to neglect them all . Never a `` quick study '' , he now made no attempt to learn his `` lines '' and many a mile of film was wasted , many a scene -- sometimes involving as many as a thousand fellow thespians -- was taken thirty , forty , fifty times because Miss Poitrine's co-star and `` helpmate '' had never learned his part . Each time Letch `` went up '' in his `` lines '' , I was the one to be patient , helpful and apologetic while he indulged in outbursts of temperament , profanity and abuse , blaming others , going into `` sulks '' and , on more occasions than I care to count , storming off the `` set '' for the rest of the day . As for his finances , I was never privileged to know exactly how much money Letch had `` salted away '' . It was I who paid for our little home , the food , the liquor , the servants -- even Letch's bills at his tailor and the Los Angeles Athletic Club . Never once did he buy me a single gift and for our third anniversary he gave me a dislocated jaw . ( But that is another story . ) As for his private monies , they were rapidly dissipated in drinking , gaming and carousing . More than once I was confronted by professional gamblers , `` bookies '' , loan `` sharks '' , gangsters , `` thugs '' and `` finger men '' -- people of a class I did not even know existed -- to repay my husband's staggering losses , `` or else '' I shuddered to think that someone so dear to me could even associate with such a sinister milieu . And at three different times during our turbulent marriage strange girls , with the commonest of accents , telephoned to announce to me that Letch had sired their unborn children ! ! Having the deepest of maternal instincts , my heart fairly bled when I thought of the darling pink and white `` bundles from heaven '' I would have proudly given my husband . `` Ah , you're too old '' , was invariably his ungallant and untrue retort whenever I suggested `` starting a family '' . Letch had made it abundantly clear that he did not care for the company of my own precious daughter . I now felt it wiser to keep Baby-dear in school and -- during the summers -- at a camp run by the Society of Friends all year around . Her presence only made Letch more distant and irritable and , in the hurry of buying Chateau Belletch , I had neglected to consider a room for Baby-dear , so there was no place to put her , anyhow . ( I sometimes feel that God , in His infinite wisdom , wants us to have these inexplicable little lapses of memory . It almost always works out for the best . ) Yet I adored this man , Letch Feeley , why , I cannot say . With faint heart and a brave smile , I endured his long absences from Chateau Belletch , his coldness , his indifference , his slights and his abuse . The times I can recall when I was publicly humiliated by him -- lovely dinner parties in our Trianon Suite where the collation was postponed and postponed and postponed , only to be served dry and overcooked at a table where the host's chair was vacant ; ; a `` splash party '' at the new pool , which I had built in the hope of keeping Letch away from public beaches , when Letch and a certain Aquacutie stayed underwater together for the better part of an hour ; ; a lovely Epiphany party at Errol Flynn's , on which sacred occasion Letch stole away with an unknown `` starlet '' , leaving me `` high and dry '' to get home as best I could . These are but a sampling of the insults I endured . As Mrs. Letch Feeley , was it any wonder that I , once the social arbiter of Filmdom , was excluded from the smart entertainments given by the Astaires , the Coopers , the Gables , the Colmans , the Rathbones , the Taylors , the Thalbergs and such devout , closely knit families as the Barrymores and the Crosbys ? ? As Letch's antisocial conduct increased , our invitations decreased and my heart was in my mouth whenever I played hostess at a fashionable `` screenland '' gathering . Between 1935 and 1939 Letch and I made ten films together , each less successful , both artistically and commercially , than the one before it . Our last joint venture , Sainted Lady , a deeply religious film based on the life of Mother Cabrini , and timed so that its release date would coincide with the beatification of America's first saint in November , 1938 , was a fiasco from start to finish . As I was playing Mother Cabrini , the picture was actually `` all mine '' , with nearly every scene built around me . But in order to keep Letch in the public eye and out of trouble , I wrote in a part especially for him -- that of a dashing ruffian who `` sees the light '' and is saved by the inspiring example of Mother Cabrini . And did he appreciate my efforts on his behalf ? ? Did he trouble to memorize the very small part which I had `` tailor-made '' to his specifications , a role eventually cut down to three short speeches ? ? Did he show the rest of the cast -- numbering four thousand -- the consideration of arriving at the studio punctually -- or even at all ? ? He did not ! ! The `` shooting '' went on for eight months ! ! Most of our working days were spent on the telephone calling `` bookies '' , illegal gambling dens , a certain `` residential club for young actresses '' , more than a hundred different bars or the steam room of the athletic club . Whenever he deigned to appear at the studio he was `` hung over '' , uncooperative , rude and insulting . He made many tasteless , irreverent and unfunny remarks , not only about me in the title role , but about religion in general . By the time the film was released we were three million dollars over-spent , war was imminent and the public apparently had forgotten all about Mother Cabrini . Thanks to Letch Feeley and the terrible strain he imposed on me , the notices were few and unfavorable . Only George Santayana seemed to understand and appreciate the film when he wrote : `` Miss Poitrine has perpetrated the most eloquent argument for the Protestant faith yet unleashed by Hollywood '' . But it was small consolation . In a rare fit of anger and spite , I `` farmed out '' my own husband to a small and most undistinguished studio to make one picture as a form of punishment . ( An actor must have discipline . ) The film was called The Diet of Worms , which I felt was just what Letch deserved . It turned out to be a life of Martin Luther , of all things ! ! It was a disaster ! ! In clothes , Letch simply did not project . He was laughed off the screen . At the same time , however , I availed myself of the services of that great English actor and master of make-up , Sir Gauntley Pratt , to do a `` quickie '' called The Mystery of the Mad Marquess , in which I played a young American girl who inherits a haunted castle on the English moors which is filled with secret passages and sliding panels and , unbeknownst to anyone , is still occupied by an eccentric maniac . It was a `` potboiler '' made on a `` shoestring '' and not the sort of film I like , as all I had to do was look blank and scream a great deal . My heart was not in it , but , oddly enough , it remains the most financially successful picture of my career . ( I watched it on television late one night last week and it `` stands up '' remarkably well , even twenty years later . ) Letch had returned from his debacle unrepentant and more badly behaved than before . I really loved that boy , and , in a feverish attempt to preserve our marriage and to try to revive the wonderful , wonderful person Letch had once been , I took my troubles to Momma , hoping that her earthy advice would help me . `` If I could only think of something at the studio , near me , to absorb his boundless energy '' , I said . `` What is Letch interested in '' ? ? `` Bookies , booze and babes '' , Momma said bluntly . Her reply stung me , but this was too important to let my hurt make any difference . `` I can't turn the studio into a gambling hell or a saloon '' , I said . Up to date , however , his garden was still more or less of a mess , he hadn't even started his workshop and if there was a meadow pond in the neighborhood he hadn't found it . It wasn't his fault that these things were so . The difficulty was that each day seemed to produce its quota of details which must be cleaned up immediately . As a result , life had become a kind of continuous make-ready . Once he disposed of these items which screamed so harshly for attention , he could undertake the things which really counted . Then , at last , his day would fall into an ordered pattern and he would be free to read , or garden or just wander through the woods in the late afternoon , accompanied by his dogs . His dogs ? ? He had almost forgotten them , although they had played such an important part in his early dreams . Then they had always been romping around him on these walks , yelping with delight , dashing off into the bushes on fruitless hunting expeditions , returning to jump up on him triumphantly with muddy paws . Dogs did something to one's ego . They were constantly assuring you that you were one of the world's great guys . Regardless of how much of a slob you knew yourself to be , you could be certain they would never find out -- and even if they did it would make no difference . Now it became increasingly apparent that there were to be no dogs in the picture . What in the world were you going to do with a lot of dogs when you left for town on Monday afternoons ? ? You certainly couldn't take them into the little apartment and if you tried to farm them out for two or three days every week they would become so confused that they would have nervous breakdowns . Why in the world couldn't he live in one place the way everyone else seemed to ? ? It worried him , this inability to get the simplest things done in the course of a day . He would wake up in the middle of the night and fret about it . How in the world had he formerly found time to build up a business , raise a family , be on half a dozen boards , work actively on committees and either go out in the evening or plow through the contents of a bulging brief case ? ? Was it possible that as people grow older the nature of time changed ? ? Could it be that it speeded up for the aged in some mysterious way , as if a bored universe were skipping through the end of the chapter just to get it over with ? ? Or was the answer less metaphysical ? ? Did older people work more slowly ? ? Did it take a man of sixty-five longer to write a letter , shave , clean out a barn , read a newspaper , than a man of thirty ? ? Did men become perfectionists as they grew older , polishing , polishing , reluctant to let go ? ? It might be that certain people were born with a compulsion to complicate their lives , while others could live blissfully motionless almost indefinitely , like lizards in the sun , too indolent to blink their eyes . Perhaps it was his misfortune , or good fortune , whichever way one looked at it , to belong to the former group , and he was struggling unconsciously to build up pressure in a world which demanded none , which was positively antagonistic to it . And then again perhaps the reason why he couldn't find time to do any of the things he had planned to do after retirement : reading , roaming , gardening , lying on his back and watching the clouds go by , was because he didn't want to do them . There was no compulsion behind them . They could be done or left undone and nobody really gave a damn . During all his busy life he had only done things which had to be done . This habit had become so fixed over the years that it seemed futile to do anything for which no one was waiting . He looked at the luminous dial of his wrist watch . It was five minutes after four . On some distant farm a rooster crowed and , far down the valley , an associate answered . He turned over impatiently and pulled the sheet over his head against the treacherous encroachment of the dawn . At least he could buy the equipment for his workshop . Thus committed , action might follow . He went down to Mills and Bradley's Hardware Store and bought a full set of carpenter's tools , including a rotary power saw and several other pieces of power machinery that Mr. Mills said were essential for babbiting and doweling , whatever they were . He also bought a huge square of pegboard for hanging up his tools , and lumber for his workbench , sandpaper and glue and assorted nails , levels and T squares and plumb lines and several gadgets that he had no idea how to use or what they were for . `` There '' , said Mr. Mills . `` That'll get you started . Best not to get everything at once . Add things as you find you need 'em '' . He didn't even ask the cost of this collection . After all , if you were going to set up a workshop you had to have the proper equipment and that was that . When he returned home , the station wagon loaded with tools , Jinny had gone with a friend to some meeting in the village , using the recently purchased second car . He was glad . It gave him a chance to unload the stuff and get it down to the cellar without a barrage of acid comments . He had made such a fuss about buying that second car that he knew he was vulnerable . He piled everything neatly in a corner of the cellar and turned to stare at the blank stone wall . That was where the pegboard would go on which he would hang his hand tools . In front of it would be his workbench . The old nightmare which had caused him so many wakeful hours came charging in on him once more , only this time he couldn't pacify it with a sleeping pill and send it away . How in the world did one attach a pegboard to a stone wall ? ? How did one attach anything to a stone wall , for that matter ? ? After the pegboard there would be the paneling . He sat down on an old box and focused on the problem . Perhaps one bored holes in the stone with some kind of an electric gadget . But then , when you stuck things into the holes , why didn't they come right out again ? ? It all seemed rather hopeless . He turned his attention to the workbench . Perhaps that was the first thing to do . A workbench had a heavy top and sturdy legs , but how did you attach sturdy legs to a heavy top so that the whole thing didn't wobble like a newborn calf and ultimately collapse when you leaned on it ? ? Mr. Mills had done some figuring on a scrap of paper and given him the various kinds of boards and two-by-fours which , properly handled , would , he had assured him , turn into a workbench . They lay on the cellar floor in a disorderly pile . Mr. Crombie poked at it gingerly with his foot . How could anyone know what to do with an assortment like that ? ? Perhaps he had better have someone help him put up the pegboard and build the workbench -- someone who knew what he was about . Then at least he would have a place to hang his tools and something to work on . After that everything should be simpler . He went upstairs to phone Crumb . To his amazement he reached him . Mr. Crumb was laid up with a bad cold . He didn't seem to think that attaching a pegboard to a stone wall was much of a problem and he tossed off the building of the worktable equally lightly . The only trouble was that he himself was tied up on the school job . That was why he hadn't been able to finish the porch . No , he didn't know of any handyman-carpenter . There wasn't any such thing any more . Carpenters all wanted steady work and at the moment every mother's son for twenty miles around that could hammer nails for twenty-five dollars a day was working on the school job . There was a fellow named Blatz over Smithtown way . Nobody liked to hire him because you never could tell when he was going to be taken drunk . Mr. Crumb would probably see him at Lodge Meeting the next night . If he was sober , which was doubtful , he'd have him get in touch with Mr. Crombie . Mr. Blatz had been at least sober enough to remember to telephone and he turned out to be the greatest boon that had come into Mr. Crombie's life since he moved to Highfield , in spite of the fact that he didn't work very fast or very long at a time , and he didn't like to work at all unless Mr. Crombie hung around and talked to him . He said he was the lonely type and working in a cellar you saw funny things coming out of the cracks in the wall if they wasn't nobody with you . So Mr. Crombie sat on a wooden box and talked in order to keep Mr. Blatz's mind from funny things . At the same time he watched carefully to see how one attached pegboards to stone walls , but Mr. Blatz was usually standing in his line of vision and it all seemed so simple that he didn't like to disclose his ignorance . While Mr. Blatz was putting up the pegboards and starting the workbench , Mr. Crombie told him of this idea about paneling the whole end of the cellar . Mr. Blatz agreed that this would be pretty . Without further discussion he appeared the next morning with a pile of boards sticking over the end of his light truck and proceeded with the paneling , which he then stained and waxed according to his taste . `` Now '' , he said , `` we got to put in some outlets for them power tools ; ; then a couple of fluorescent lamps over the workbench an' I guess we're about through down here '' . It all did look very efficient and shipshape . There was no question of that . `` By the way '' , said Mr. Blatz , packing his tools into a battered carrier , `` them power tools needs extra voltage . I guess you know about that . Before you use 'em the light company's got to run in a heavy line and you'll need a new fuse box for the extra circuits . That ain't too bad 'ceptin' the light company's so busy you can't ever get 'em to do nothin' '' . Instead of being depressed by this news , Mr. Crombie was actually relieved . At least the moment was postponed when he had to face the mystery of the power tools . He followed Mr. Blatz up the cellar stairs . As usual , Mrs. Crombie was standing in the midst of a confusion of cooking utensils . Mr. Blatz sat down in the only unoccupied kitchen chair . `` Well '' , he said , `` got your man fixed up nice down there . He oughta be able to build a new house with all them contraptions '' . Mr. Crombie watched his wife with an anxious expression . `` I was just sayin' to him that I'm all ready now for anything else you want done '' . Mr. Crombie couldn't remember his saying any such thing . `` Oh , that's wonderful '' , cried Mrs. Crombie . `` I have a thousand things for you to do . Doors that won't open , and doors that won't close and shelves and broken -- '' `` But those are the things I built the workshop for '' , protested Mr. Crombie . `` Those are the things I can do , now that I'm set up '' . `` I've been waiting to get these things done for months '' , she said . `` We won't live long enough if I wait for you , besides which you don't need to worry -- there'll be plenty more '' . But the discussion was academic . Mr. Blatz was already taking measurements for a shelf above the kitchen sink . Ambiguity Nothing in English has been ridiculed as much as the ambiguous use of words , unless it be the ambiguous use of sentences . Ben Franklin said , `` Clearly spoken , Mr. Fogg . You explain English by Greek '' . Richard Brinsley Sheridan said , `` I think the interpreter is the hardest to be understood of the two '' . And a witty American journalist remarked over a century ago what is even more true today , `` Many a writer seems to think he is never profound except when he can't understand his own meaning '' . There are many types of ambiguity and many of them have been described by rhetoricians under such names as amphibology , parisology , and other ologies . In common parlance they would be described as misses -- misinterpreters , misunderstanders , misdirectors and kindred misdeeds . One species of ambiguity tries to baffle by interweaving repetition . `` Did you or did you not say what I said you said , because Jane said you never said what I said '' ? ? Another woman , addressing Christmas cards , said to her husband : `` We sent them one last year but they didn't send us one , so they probably won't send us one this year because they'll think we won't send them one because they didn't last year , don't you think , or shall we '' ? ? Such ambiguous exercises compound confusion by making it worse compounded , and they are sometimes expanded until the cream of the jest sours . Ambiguity of a non-repetitious kind describes the dilemma one girl found herself in . `` I'm terribly upset '' , she told a girl-friend . `` I wrote Bill in my last letter to forget that I had told him that I didn't mean to reconsider my decision not to change my mind -- and he seems to have misunderstood me '' . Evidently Bill was another of those men who simply don't understand women . Another case involves a newspaper reporter who tripped up a politician . `` Mr. Jones , you may recall that we printed last week your denial of having retracted the contradiction of your original statement . Now would you care to have us say that you were misquoted in regard to it '' ? ? Questions like this , framed in verbal fog , are perhaps the only kind that have ever stumped an experienced politician . They recall Byron's classic comment : `` I wish he would explain his explanation '' . Similarly , when a reporter once questioned Lincoln in cryptic fashion , Lincoln refused to make any further statement . `` I fear explanations explanatory of things explained '' , he said , leaving the biter bit -- and bitter . The obscurity of politicians may not always be as innocent as it looks . `` Senator '' , said an interviewer , `` your constituents can't understand from your speech last night just how you stand on the question '' . `` Good '' ! ! Replied the Senator . `` It took me five hours to write it that way '' . The misplaced modifier is another species more honored in the observance of obscurity than in the breach . This creates an amusing effect because its position in a sentence seems to make it apply to the wrong word . A verse familiar to all grammarians is the quatrain : `` I saw a man once beat his wife When on a drunken spree . Now can you tell me who was drunk -- The man , his wife , or me '' ? ? The `` wooden-leg '' gag of vaudeville , another standby of this sort , had endless variations . `` There's a man outside with a wooden leg named Smith '' . `` What's the name of his other leg '' ? ? Another stock vaudeville gag ran : `` Mother is home sick in bed with the doctor '' . When radio came in , it continued the misplaced modifier in its routines as a standard device . `` Do you see that pretty girl standing next to the car with slacks on '' ? ? `` I see the girl but I don't see the car with slacks on '' . In recent years gagwriters have discovered this brand of blunder and thus the misplaced modifier has acquired a new habitat in the gagline . In one cartoon a family is shown outside a theater with the head of the family addressing the doorman : `` Excuse me , but when we came out we found that we had left my daughter's handbag and my wife's behind '' . Journalism supplies us with an endless run of such slips . Not long ago a newspaper advised those taking part in a contest that `` snapshots must be of a person not larger than Af inches '' . Classified ads are also chockfull of misrelated constructions . Readers of the Reader's Digest are familiar with such items which often appear in its lists of verbal slips , like the ad in a California paper that advertised `` House for rent . View takes in five counties , two bedrooms '' . Since brevity is the soul of ambiguity as well as wit , newspaper headlines continually provide us with amusing samples . `` Officials Meet on rubbish . Many Shapes in bathtubs . Son and Daughter of Local Couple Married '' . Apart from misplaced modifiers and headlinese , journalism contributes a wide variety of comic ambiguities in both editorial and advertising matter . A weekly newspaper reported a local romance : `` and the couple were married last Saturday , thus ending a friendship which began in their schooldays '' . An item in the letters column of a newspaper renewed a subscription , adding : `` I personally enjoy your newspaper as much as my husband '' . Then there was the caterer's ad which read : `` are you getting married or having an affair ? ? We have complete facilities to accommodate 200 people '' . The newspaper too is the favorite habitat of the anatomical . This slip is so-called because its semi-ambiguous English always seems to refer to a person's anatomy but never quite means what it seems to say . Samples : He walked in upon her invitation . She kissed him passionately upon his reappearance . He kissed her back . Not without good reason has the anatomical been called jocular journalese . In news items a man is less often shot in the body or head than in the suburbs . `` While Henry Morgan was escorting Miss Vera Green from the church social last Saturday night , a savage dog attacked them and bit Mr. Morgan on the public square '' . Such items recall the California journalist who reported an accident involving a movie star : `` The area in which Miss N -- was injured is spectacularly scenic '' . The double meaning in the anatomical made it a familiar vaudeville device , as in the gags of Weber and Fields . When a witness at court was asked if he had been kicked in the ensuing rumpus , he replied , `` No , it was in the stomach '' . Strangely enough , this always brought the house down . Apart from journalese and vaudeville gags , the anatomical is also found in jocular literature . A conscientious girl became the secretary of a doctor . Her first day at work she was puzzled by an entry in the doctor's notes on an emergency case . It read : `` Shot in the lumbar region '' . After a moment of thought , her mind cleared and , in the interest of clarity , she typed into the record : `` Shot in the woods '' . There are many grammatical misconstructions other than dangling modifiers and anatomicals which permit two different interpretations . At the home of a gourmet the new maid was instructed in the fine points of serving . `` I want the fish served whole , with head and tail '' , the epicure explained , `` and serve it with lemon in mouth '' . The maid demurred . `` That's silly -- lemon in mouth '' , she said . But since the gourmet insisted that it is done that way at the most fashionable dinners , the girl reluctantly agreed . So she brought the fish in whole , and she carried a lemon in her mouth . Another specimen of such double-entendre is illustrated by a woman in a department store . She said to the saleslady , `` I want a dress to put on around the house '' . The puzzled saleslady inquired , `` How large is your house , Madam '' ? ? This saleslady was a failure in the dress department and was transferred to the shoe department . When a customer asked for alligator shoes , she said , `` What size is your alligator '' ? ? The comic indefinite comprises an extensive class of comedy . One species is restricted to statements which are neither explicit nor precise regarding a particular person , place , time or thing . A woman met a famous author at a literary tea . `` Oh , I'm so delighted to meet you '' , she gushed . `` It was only the other day that I saw something of yours , about something or other , in some magazine '' . This baffling lack of distinct details recalls the secretary whose employer was leaving the office and told her what to answer if anyone called in his absence . `` I may be back '' , he explained , `` and then again , I may not '' . The girl nodded understandingly . `` Yes , sir '' , she said , `` is that definite '' ? ? An old-fashioned mother said to her modern daughter , `` You must have gotten in quite late last night , dear . Where were you '' ? ? The daughter replied , `` Oh , I had dinner with -- well , you don't know him but he's awfully nice -- and we went to a couple of places -- I don't suppose you've heard of them -- and we finished up at a cute little night club -- I forget the name of it . Why , it's all right , isn't it , Mother '' ? ? Her woolly-minded parent agreed . `` Of course , dear '' , she said . `` It's only that I like to know where you go '' . No less ambiguous was the indefinity of a certain clergyman's sermon . `` Dearly beloved '' , he preached , `` unless you repent of your sins in a measure , and become converted to a degree , you will , I regret to say , be damned to a more or less extent '' . This clergyman should have referred to Shakespeare's dictum : `` So-so is a good , very good , very excellent maxim . And yet it is not . It is but so-so '' . Indefinite reference also carries double-meaning where an allusion to one person or thing seems to refer to another . A news item described the launching of a ship : `` Completing the ceremony , the beautiful movie star smashed a bottle of champagne over her stern as she slid gracefully down the ways into the sea '' . This is not unlike the order received by the sergeant of an army motor pool : `` Four trucks to Fort Mason gym , 7:30 tonight , for hauling girls to dance . The bodies must be cleaned and seats wiped off '' . A politician was approached by a man seeking the office of a minor public official who had just died . `` What are my chances for taking Joe's place '' ? ? He asked . `` If you can fix it up with the undertaker '' , returned the politician , `` it's all right with me '' . The manager of a movie theater received a telephone call from a woman who was equally indefinite . `` What have you got on today '' ? ? She inquired . `` A blue suit '' , he answered . `` Who's in it '' ? ? She continued . `` I am '' , he said . There was a short pause for reflection . `` Oh '' , said the woman , `` I've seen that picture already '' . Another brand of indefinite reference arises out of the use of the double verb . When a question contains two verbs , the response does not make clear which of them is being answered . The moonlit night was made for romance , and he had been looking at her soulfully for some time . Finally he asked , `` Do you object to petting '' ? ? `` That's one thing I've never done '' , she said promptly . He thought a moment , then inquired , `` You mean petted '' ? ? `` No '' , she smiled , `` objected '' . Replies to requests for character reference are notorious for their evasive double-entendre . It would be hard to find anything more equivocal than : `` I cannot recommend him too highly '' . Another less ambiguous case read as follows : `` The bearer of this letter has served me for two years to his complete satisfaction . If you are thinking of giving him a berth , be sure to make it a wide one '' . In the comedy of indefinite reference , it-wit occupies a prominent place because of its frequent occurrence . Ambiguity arises when the pronoun it carries a twofold reference . Two friends were talking . One said , `` When I get a cold I buy a bottle of whiskey for it , and within a few hours it's gone '' . The speaker referred to the whiskey but his friend thought he meant the cold . It-wit is a misnomer because it covers slips as well as wit . An excited woman was making an emergency call over the phone : `` Doctor , please come over right away . My husband is in great pain . I called the other afternoon on my old friend , Graves Moreland , the Anglo-American literary critic -- his mother was born in Ohio -- who lives alone in a fairy-tale cottage on the Upson Downs , raising hell and peacocks , the former only when the venerable gentleman becomes an angry old man about the state of literature or something else that is dwindling and diminishing , such as human stature , hope , and humor . My unscientific friend does not believe that human stature is measurable in terms of speed , momentum , weightlessness , or distance from earth , but is a matter of the development of the human mind . After Gagarin became the Greatest Man in the World , for a nation that does not believe in the cult of personality or in careerism , Moreland wrote me a letter in which he said : `` I am not interested in how long a bee can live in a vacuum , or how far it can fly . A bee's place is in the hive '' . `` I have come to talk with you about the future of humor and comedy '' , I told him , at which he started slightly , and then made us each a stiff drink , with a trembling hand . `` I seem to remember '' , he said , `` that in an interview ten years ago you gave humor and comedy five years to live . Did you go to their funeral '' ? ? `` I was wrong '' , I admitted . `` Comedy didn't die , it just went crazy . It has identified itself with the very tension and terror it once did so much to alleviate . We now have not only what has been called over here the comedy of menace but we also have horror jokes , magazines known as Horror Comics , and sick comedians . There are even publications called Sick and Mad . The Zeitgeist is not crazy as a loon or mad as a March hare ; ; it is manic as a man '' . `` I woke up this morning '' , Moreland said , `` paraphrasing Lewis Carroll . Do you want to hear the paraphrase '' ? ? `` Can I bear it '' ? ? I asked , taking a final gulp of my drink , and handing him the empty glass . `` Just barely '' , he said , and repeated his paraphrase : `` The time has come '' , the walrus said , `` To speak of manic things , Of shots and shouts , and sealing dooms Of commoners and kings '' . Moreland fixed us each another drink , and said , `` For God's sake , tell me something truly amusing '' . `` I'll try '' , I said , and sat for a moment thinking . `` Oh yes , the other day I reread some of Emerson's English Traits , and there was an anecdote about a group of English and Americans visiting Germany , more than a hundred years ago . In the railway station at Berlin , a uniformed attendant was chanting , ' Foreigners this way ! ! Foreigners this way ' ! ! One woman -- she could have been either English or American -- went up to him and said , ' But you are the foreigners ' '' . I took a deep breath and an even deeper swallow of my drink , and said , `` I admit that going back to Ralph Waldo Emerson for humor is like going to a modern musical comedy for music and comedy '' . `` What's the matter with the music '' ? ? Moreland asked . `` It doesn't drown out the dialogue '' , I explained . `` Let's talk about books '' , Moreland said . `` I am told that in America you have non-books by non-writers , brought out by non-publishers for non-readers . Is it all non-fiction '' ? ? `` There is non-fiction and non non-fiction '' , I said . `` Speaking of nonism : the other day , in a story about a sit-down demonstration , the Paris Herald Tribune wrote , ' The non-violence became noisier . And then Eichmann was quoted as saying , in non-English , that Hitler's plan to exterminate the Jews was nonsense '' . `` If we cannot tell evil , horror , and insanity from nonsense , what is the future of humor and comedy '' ? ? Moreland asked , grimly . `` Cryptic '' , I said . `` They require , for existence , a brave spirit and a high heart , and where do you find these ? ? In our present era of Science and Angst , the heart has been downgraded , to use one of our popular retrogressive verbs '' . `` I know what you mean '' , Moreland sighed . `` Last year your Tennessee Williams told our Dilys Powell , in a television program , that it is the task of the playwright to throw light into the dark corners of the human heart . Like almost everybody else , he confused the heart , both as organ and as symbol , with the disturbed psyche , the deranged glands , and the jumpy central nervous system . I'm not pleading for the heart that leaps up when it beholds a rainbow in the sky , or for the heart that with rapture fills and dances with the daffodils . The sentimental pure heart of Galahad is gone with the knightly years , but I still believe in the heart of the George Meredith character that was not made of the stuff that breaks '' . `` We no longer have Tom Moore's and Longfellow's ' heart for any fate ' , either '' , I said . `` Moore and Longfellow didn't have the fate that faces us '' , Moreland said . `` One day our species promises co-existence , and the next day it threatens co-extinction '' . We sat for a while drinking in silence . `` The heart '' , I said finally , `` is now either in the throat or the mouth or the stomach or the shoes . When it was worn in the breast , or even on the sleeve , we at least knew where it was '' . There was a long silence . `` You have visited England five times in the past quarter-century , I believe '' , my host said . `` What has impressed you most on your present visit '' ? ? `` I would say depressed , not impressed '' , I told him . `` I should say it is the turning of courts of law into veritable theatres for sex dramas , involving clergymen and parishioners , psychiatrists and patients . It is becoming harder and harder to tell law courts and political arenas from the modern theatre '' . `` Do you think we need a new Henry James to re-explore the Anglo-American scene '' ? ? He asked . `` Or perhaps a new Noel Coward '' ? ? `` But you must have heard it said that the drawing-room disappeared forever with the somnolent years of James and the antic heyday of Coward . I myself hear it said constantly -- in drawing-rooms . In them , there is usually a group of Anglo-Americans with tragicomic problems , worthy of being explored either in the novel or in the play or in comedy and satire '' . I stood up and began pacing . `` If you are trying to get us out of the brothel , the dustbin , the kitchen sink , and the tawdry living-room , you are probably wasting your time '' , Moreland told me . `` Too many of our writers seem to be interested only in creatures that crawl out of the woodwork or from under the rock '' . `` Furiouser and furiouser '' , I said . `` I am worried about the current meanings of the word funny . It now means ominous , as when one speaks of a funny sound in the motor ; ; disturbing , as when one says that a friend is acting funny ; ; and frightening , as when a wife tells the police that it is funny , but her husband hasn't been home for two days and nights '' . Moreland sat brooding for a full minute , during which I made each of us a new drink . He took his glass , clinked it against mine , and said , `` Toujours gai , what the hell '' ! ! Borrowing a line from Don Marquis' Mehitabel . `` Be careful of the word ' gay ' , for it , too , has undergone a change . It now means , in my country , homosexual '' , I said . `` Oh , I forgot to say that if one is taken to the funny house in the funny wagon , he is removed to a mental institution in an ambulance . Recently , by the way , I received a questionnaire in which I was asked whether or not I was non-institutionalized '' . My host went over and stared out the window at his peacocks ; ; then he turned to me . `` Is it true that you believe the other animals are saner than the human species '' ? ? `` Oh , that is demonstrable '' , I told him . `` Do you remember the woman in the French Alps who was all alone with her sheep one day when the sun darkened ominously ? ? She told the sheep , ' The world is coming to an end ' ! ! And the sheep said -- all in unison , I have no doubt -- ba-a-a ! ! The sound mockery of sheep is like the salubrious horse laugh '' . `` That is only partly non-nonsense '' , he began . `` If you saw the drama called Rhinoceros '' , I said , `` think of the effect it would have on an audience of rhinos when the actor on stage suddenly begins turning into a rhinoceros . The rhinos would panic , screaming help ! ! -- if that can be screamed in their language '' . `` You think the Russians are getting ahead of us in comedy '' ? ? Moreland demanded . `` Non-God , no '' , I said . `` The political and intellectual Left began fighting humor and comedy years ago , because they fear things they do not understand and cannot manage , such as satire and irony , such as humor and comedy . Nevertheless , like any other human being upon whom the spotlight of the world plays continually , Khrushchev , the anti-personality cultist , has become a comic actor , or thinks he has . In his famous meeting with Nixon a couple of years ago he seemed to believe that he was as funny as Ed Wynn . But , like Caesar , he has only one joke , so far as I can find out . It consists in saying , ' That would be sending the goat to look after the cabbage . Why in the name of his non-God doesn't he vary it a bit '' ? ? `` Such as '' ? ? Moreland asked . `` Such as ' sending the cat to guard the mice ' , or ' the falcon to protect the dove ' , or most terribly sharp of all , ' the human being to save humanity ' '' . `` You and I have fallen out of literature into politics '' , Moreland observed . `` What a nasty fall was there '' ! ! I said . Moreland went over to stare at his peacocks again , and then came back and sat down , restively . `` The world that was once foot-loose and fancy-free '' , he said , `` has now become screw-loose and frenzy-free . In our age of Science and Angst it seems to me more brave to stay on Earth and explore inner man than to fly far from the sphere of our sorrow and explore outer space '' . `` The human ego being what it is '' , I put in , `` science fiction has always assumed that the creatures on the planets of a thousand larger solar systems than ours must look like gigantic tube-nosed fruit bats . It seems to me that the first human being to reach one of these planets may well learn what it is to be a truly great and noble species '' . `` Now we are leaving humor and comedy behind again '' , Moreland protested . `` Not in the largest sense of the words '' , I said . `` The other day Arnold Toynbee spoke against the inveterate tendency of our species to believe in the uniqueness of its religions , its ideologies , and its virtually everything else . Why do we not realize that no ideology believes so much in itself as it disbelieves in something else ? ? Forty years ago an English writer , W. L. George , dealt with this subject in Eddies of the Day , and said , as an example , that ' Saint George for Merry England ' would not start a spirit half so quickly as ' Strike frog-eating Frenchmen dead ' '' ! ! `` There was also Gott strafe Angleterre '' , Moreland reminded me , `` and Carthago delenda est , or if you will , Deus strafe Carthage . It isn't what the ideologist believes in , but what he hates , that puts the world in jeopardy . This is the force , in our time and in every other time , that urges the paranoiac and the manic-depressive to become head of a state . Complete power not only corrupts but it also attracts the mad . There is a bitter satire for a future writer in that '' . `` Great satire has always been clearly written and readily understandable '' , I said . `` But we now find writers obsessed by the nooks and crannies of their ivory towers , and curiously devoted to the growing obscurity and complexity of poetry and non-poetry . I wrote a few years ago that one of the cardinal rules of writing is that the reader should be able to get some idea of what the story is about . One day , the children had wanted to get up onto General Burnside's horse . They wanted to see what his back felt like -- the General's . He looked so comfortable being straight . They wanted to touch the mystery . Arlene was boosting them up when the policeman came by . He was very rude . Arlene had a hard voice , too , this time . The policeman's eyes rather popped for a second ; ; but then Arlene got another tone in a hurry , and she said , `` If it wasn't for these dear children '' -- . The policeman got a confused , funny look on his face , and he had answered kind of politely , `` Now , look here , lady : I know you got to entertain these kids and all . But this is a public park and it's a city ordinance that the statues cannot be crawled on '' . Arlene was so ashamed that she hung her head when she said , `` Yes , sir '' . The policeman walked on , but he looked back once . That had happened on the day when two other unusual things had occurred . Arlene had taught them a new way to have fun in their little private area ; ; and they had told their mother about the tumbles . In matters of exact information , that kept her one step behind developments ; ; and so they were consistently true to their principles . `` Never mind '' , Arlene had said , after the policeman had left , having pursued the usual unco-operative course of grownups . `` Never mind . I know something that is much more fun that we can do on our little lawn '' . `` What is it '' ? ? Asked the children , whose reflexes and replies were invariably so admirably normal and predictable . Maybe that was why they were cordial and loyal towards the unpredictability of Arlene . `` Just you wait '' , advised Arlene , echoing the dialogue in a recent British movie . And when they had got to their little lawn , they had had a most twirlingly magnificent time . First , Arlene had put them through some rapid somersaults . They had protested that that wasn't any surprise . `` Just you wait '' , said Arlene again , as though she were discovering the pleasantly tingling insinuations of that handy little sturdy statement . `` This is a warm-up '' . `` Is it anything like cooked-over oatmeal '' ? ? Asked one of the children . `` Not the least bit '' , Arlene snapped . One of the many things that was so nice about her was that she always took your questions seriously , particularly your very , very serious questions . Those were especially the ones that all other grownups laughed at loudest . She would sometimes even get a little hard on you , she took you so seriously . But not hard for very long . Just long enough to make you feel important . `` Now '' , said Arlene , eventually , making them both sit in formation on a big root of a live oak , the sort of root that divided itself and made their bottoms sag down and feel comfortable . `` Now , we're going to be like what General Burnside and his horse make us think of '' . The children looked at each other and sagged their bottoms down even more comfortably than ever . Their curiosity went happily out of bounds . Then , Arlene threw herself backwards and wiggled in a way that was just wonderful . She held herself that way and turned her head towards them and laughed and winked . `` Imagine being able to laugh and wink when you're like the top part of that picture frame at home '' , one of them said . They both laughed and winked back . `` I'm General Burnside's horse , upside down '' , Arlene said , sort of gaspingly , for her : even she had to breathe kind of funny when she was in that position . She made General Burnside's horse's belly do so funny when it was upside down . Then , she was back on her feet , winking and smiling that enormous smile ( she had lots of wonderful big teeth that you never would have suspected she had when she was not smiling ) . And she would wink and throw kisses . They both tried to keep smiling and winking for a long time , but it made their lips and eyelids tremble . But they kept on clapping for a long , long time . `` This time '' , Arlene said , and she even kept on wiggling a little bit while she was just talking , `` you're going to tell me what I am and what I'm doing . It all has something to do with General Burnside and his horse '' . This time , it was so grand ; ; they could tell exactly what it was . It was General Burnside's horse running in a circle . His legs shook , and the shaking went right on up his body through his hips to his shoulders . `` That's the General's horse '' , one of them cried out . The other remarked , in a happy laughter , `` That's a funny old horse '' . The first one said , `` He sure does shake . He's old '' . Then there was the General kissing his wife . They had to be told that one . But it was even funnier after they had been told . Their father , when he came back from those many business trips , just bumped their mother on the forehead with his lips and asked if anybody had thought to mix the martinis and put them in the electric icebox . But not General Burnside . He was the funniest man . He never could keep still , even when he didn't move his feet . Then , they had to get up and be General Burnside . Or his horse . All they could think of was to run around in circles , kicking their legs out . It wasn't very funny . Then , they said General Burnside was going to jump over his horse's head ; ; and they did some somersaults . But that wasn't very funny , either . `` You ought to shake '' , Arlene advised them . And Arlene showed them how to begin . She also taught them to sing `` I wish I could shimmy like my sister Kate '' . That helped a lot . They were clumsy , but they were beginning to catch on . They also caught on a little bit on how to smile a lot without your lips trembling . `` Imagine you won't get your allowance if you're caught not smiling -- or smiling with your lips trembling too much '' , Arlene suggested . That helped a great deal . They were a little late in getting home . `` I'm sorry , Mrs. Minks '' , Arlene said in a tone so low you could hardly hear it . My mother constituted herself the voice of all of us . `` It's perfectly understandable , Arlene '' , my mother said in a friendly way . `` I suppose you all were playing and forgot '' ? ? `` Yes , ma'am '' , the children chorused heartily . We couldn't help laughing . The children rushed off to get rid of their sweaters ; ; and Arlene began tapping the kitchen door open . `` Arlene's a good girl '' , my uncle remarked to us ; ; but he said it too soon , for it came out just before the tap to which the door responded . That tap had a slight bangish quality . `` She really is a dear little thing '' , my mother agreed . Her upper lip lifted slightly . She was biting into a small red radish ; ; and that action always caused her to lift her lip from the sting of the thing . Also , she lived in continual fear of finding a white worm curled up in a neat , mean little heap at the white center of the radish . She would try to see over the bulge of her cheeks and somewhat under her teeth to the place where she was biting . It never worked , naturally ; ; but it made her look unusual . Also , when she had bitten off half of the small radish , she found the suspense unbearable ; ; and she would snatch the finger-held half of the radish out to where she could inspect it . One could hear a very faint , ladylike sigh of relief . Actually , it was inaudible to anyone not expecting it . But the warm joy of her brown eyes was open to the general public . Later on , the children told her further about somersaulting . `` It must be awfully good for them . And awfully kind of Arlene '' , she told us later . `` But do you know something curious '' ? ? She added . `` I reached into that funny little pocket that is high up on my dress . I have no notion why I reached . And I found a radish . Was it an omen ? ? I thought for a second . But I would not pamper myself in that silly way . I opened the window and threw the radish out '' . Then , my mother blushed at this small lie ; ; for she knew and we knew that it was cowardice that had made one more radish that night just too impossible a strain . Arlene became indispensable ; ; nobody could have told why . But she was . It was in the air . A friend of my father's came to dinner . He was passing through town and phoned to say hello . As a result , he was persuaded out to dinner . As a matter of fact , this happened every four or five months . Sometimes , he coincided with my father's being at home . Sometimes , as at this juncture , he did not . But he was always persuaded out . He liked children , in a loathsome kind of way ; ; the two youngest in our family always had to be brought in and put through tricks for his entertainment . When he had left , I could never remember whether he had poked them in their middles , laughingly , with a thick index finger or whether he was merely so much the sort of person who did this that one assumed the action , not bothering to look . The children loathed him , too . This evening , they were pushed in from the breakfast room , with odds and ends of dessert distributed over them . There had been some coconut in it , for I remember my mother's taking a quick glance at a stringy bit of this nut on the cheek of one of them and then putting down her radish with a shiver . They were pushed gently into the room by Arlene -- whose only part appearing were hands that crept quickly back around to the kitchen side of the door . We had just sat down . `` Tell Mr. Gorboduc what you're doing these days '' , my mother advised the children , ceremonially . There was an air of revolt about the children -- even irreverence for their own principles . This could be told chiefly from a sort of head-tossing and prancing , a horselike balkiness of demeanor . Possibly , the coconut-containing dessert had brought up bitter problems of administration . But , at the beginning , this stayed just in the air . `` We go to the park with this nice lady '' , one of them said . `` We have good times '' . This happy bulletin convulsed Mr. Gorboduc . `` You do '' ? ? He asked , between wheezes of laughter . He was forced to wipe his eyes . `` You don't step on the flowers , do you ? ? Eh '' ? ? One of the children maneuvered out of range of the poking index finger . `` No '' , he said . `` We don't '' . Mr. Gorboduc took a swig of his sherry . He was so long thinking that my mother had time to inspect her sherry for dregs . Usually , this was done when attention was diverted by someone else's long , boring story . But this time she was nervous : she was open . Mr. Gorboduc was finally in command of his mind again . `` Tell me -- what do you do at the park '' ? ? He asked . This was delivered in a forthright way , without coyness and over-pretended interest -- an admirable way with children . Only , unfortunately , he could not remove from his voice a nagging insinuation of the direct command . This nettled the children into the revelation of exact truth , a sacrifice of their secret superiority over grown people , but a victory in the wide fields of perpetration and illegitimate accomplishment . `` We bump '' , one said ; ; and the other went on to development of the idea . `` We grind , too '' , he said . My mother was beside herself with curiosity . `` Say that again '' , she pleaded . She laughed a little and tossed the dregs rakishly around in her glass . `` You what '' ? ? She could see that Mr. Gorboduc was intrigued ; ; the hostess in her took over . She was rollickingly happy . `` You what '' ? ? My uncle looked at Mr. Gorboduc . He read Henry James and used to pretend profundity through eye-beamings at people . Mr. Gorboduc looked down . He would not look up . He was very funny about the whole thing . Pueri aquam de silvas ad agricolas portant , a delightful vignette set in the unforgettable epoch of pre-Punic War Rome . Marcellus , the hero , is beset from all sides by the problems of approaching manhood . The story opens on the eve of his fifty-third birthday , as he prepares for the two weeks of festivities that are to follow . Suddenly , a messenger arrives and , just before collapsing dead at his feet , informs him that the Saracens have invaded Silesia , the home province of his affianced . He at once cancels the celebrations and , buckling on his scimitar , stumbles blindly from the house , where he is hit and killed by a passing oxcart . The Albany Civic Opera's presentation of Spumoni's immortal Il Sevigli del Spegititgninino , with guest contralto Hattie Sforzt . An unusual , if not extraordinary , rendering of the classic myth that involves the rescue of Prometheus from the rock by the U.S. Cavalry was given last week in the warehouse of the Albany Leather Conduit Company amid cheers of `` Hubba hubba '' and `` Yalagaloo pip pip '' ! ! After a `` busy '' overture , the curtain rises on a farm scene -- the Ranavan Valley in northern Maine . A dead armadillo , the sole occupant of the stage , symbolizes the crisis and destruction of the Old Order . Old Order , acted and atonally sung by Grunnfeu Arapacis , the lovely Serbantian import , then entered and delivered the well-known invocation to the god Phineoppus , whereupon the stage is quite unexpectedly visited by a company of wandering Gorshek priests , symbolizing Love , Lust , Prudence and General Motors , respectively . According to the myth , Old Order then vanishes at stage left and reappears at extreme stage right , but Director Shuz skillfully sidesteps the rather gooshey problem of stage effects by simply having Miss Arapacis walk across the stage . The night he saw it , a rather unpleasant situation arose when the soloist refused to approach the armadillo , complaining -- in ad-lib -- that `` it smelled '' . We caught the early train to New York . The Dharma Dictionary , a list of highly unusual terms used in connection with Eurasian proto-senility cults . It's somewhat off the beaten track , to be sure , but therein lies its variety and charm . For example , probably very few people know that the word `` visrhanik '' that is bantered about so much today stems from the verb `` bouanahsha '' : to salivate . Likewise , and equally fascinating , is the news that such unlikely synonyms as `` pratakku '' , `` sweathruna '' , and the tongue-twister `` nnuolapertar-it-vuh-karti-birifw- '' all originated in the same village in Bathar-on-Walli Province and are all used to express sentiments concerning British `` imperialism '' . The terms are fairly safe to use on this side of the ocean , but before you start spouting them to your date , it might be best to find out if he was a member of Major Pockmanster's Delhi Regiment , since resentment toward the natives was reportedly very high in that outfit . The breeze and chancellor Neitzbohr , a movie melodrama that concerns the attempts of a West German politician to woo a plaster cast of the Apollo Belvedere . As you have doubtless guessed already , the plot is plastered with Freudian , Jungian , and Meinckian theory . For example , when the film is only four minutes old , Neitzbohr refers to a small , Victorian piano stool as `` Wilhelmina '' , and we are thereupon subjected to a flashback that informs us that this very piano stool was once used by an epileptic governess whose name , of course , was Doris ( the English equivalent , when passed through middle-Gaelic derivations , of Wilhelmina ) . For the remainder of the movie , Chancellor Neitzbohr proceeds to lash the piano stool with a slat from a Venetian blind that used to hang in the pre-war Reichstag . In this manner , he seeks to expunge from his own soul the guilt pangs caused by his personal assaults against the English at Dunkirk . As we find out at the end , it is not the stool ( symbolizing Doris , therefore the English ) that he is punishing but the piece of Venetian blind . And , when the slat finally shatters , we see him count the fragments , all the while muttering , `` He loves me , he loves me not '' . After a few tortuous moments of wondering who `` he '' is , the camera pans across the room to the plaster statue , and we realize that Neitzbohr is trying to redeem himself in the eyes of a mute piece of sculpture . The effect , needless to say , is almost terrifying , and though at times a bit obscure , the film is certainly a much-needed catharsis for the `` repressed '' movie-goer . The music of Bini SalFininistas , capital LP Ab63711-r , one of the rare recordings of this titanic , yet unsung , composer . Those persons who were lucky enough to see and hear the performance of his work at the Brest-Silevniov Festival in August , 1916 , will certainly welcome his return to public notice ; ; and it is not unlikely that , even as the great Bach lay dormant for so many years , so has the erudite , ingenious SalFininistas passed through his `` purgatory '' of neglect . But now , under the guidance of the contemporary composer Marc Schlek , Jr. , a major revival is under way . As he leads the Neurenschatz Skolkau Orchestra , Schlek gives a tremendously inspired performance of both the Baslot and Rattzhenfuut concertos , including the controversial Tschilwyk cadenza , which was included at the conductor's insistence . A major portion of the credit should also go to flautist Haumd for his rendering of the almost impossible `` Indianapolis '' movement in the Baslot . Not only was Haumd's intonation and phrasing without flaw , but he seemed to take every tonal eccentricity in stride . For example , to move ( as the score requires ) from the lowest F-major register up to a barely audible N minor in four seconds , not skipping , at the same time , even one of the 407 fingerings , seems a feat too absurd to consider , and it is to the flautist's credit that he remained silent throughout the passage . We would have preferred , however , to have had the rest of the orchestra refrain from laughing at this and other spots on the recording , since it mars an otherwise sober , if not lofty , performance . As Broadway itself becomes increasingly weighted down by trite , heavy-handed , commercially successful musicals and inspirational problem dramas , the American theatre is going through an inexorable renaissance in that nebulous area known as `` off-Broadway '' . For the last two years , this frontier of the arts has produced a number of so-called `` non-dramas '' which have left indelible , bittersweet impressions on the psyche of this veteran theatregoer . The latest and , significantly , greatest fruit of this theatrical vine is The , an adaptation of Basho's classic frog-haiku by Roger Entwhistle , a former University of Maryland chemistry instructor . Although the play does show a certain structural amateurishness ( there are eleven acts varying in length from twenty-five seconds to an hour and a half ) , the statement it makes concerning the ceaseless yearning and searching of youth is profound and worthy of our attention . The action centers about a group of outspoken and offbeat students sitting around a table in a cafeteria and their collective and ultimately fruitless search for a cup of hot coffee . They are relentlessly rebuffed on all sides by a waitress , the police , and an intruding government tutor . The innocence that they tried to conceal at the beginning is clearly destroyed forever when one of them , asking for a piece of lemon-meringue pie , gets a plate of English muffins instead . Leaving the theatre after the performance , I had a flash of intuition that life , after all ( as Rilke said ) , is just a search for the nonexistent cup of hot coffee , and that this unpretentious , moving , clever , bitter slice of life was the greatest thing to happen to the American theatre since Brooks Atkinson retired . Aging but still precocious , French feline enfant terrible Francoisette Lagoon has succeeded in shocking jaded old Paris again , this time with a sexy ballet scenario called The Lascivious Interlude , the story of a nymphomaniac trip-hammer operator who falls hopelessly in love with a middle-aged steam shovel . A biting , pithy parable of the all-pervading hollowness of modern life , the piece has been set by Mlle Lagoon to a sumptuous score ( a single motif played over and over by four thousand French horns ) by existentialist hot-shot Jean-Paul Sartre . Petite , lovely Yvette Chadroe plays the nymphomaniac engagingly . Ever since Bambi , and , more recently , Born Free , there have been a lot of books about animals , but few compare with Max Fink's wry , understated , charming , and immensely readable My Friend , the Quizzical Salamander . Done in the modern style of a `` confession '' , Fink tells in exquisite detail how he came to know , and , more important , love his mother's pet salamander , Alicia . It is not an entirely happy book , as Mrs. Fink soon becomes jealous of Alicia and , in retaliation , refuses to continue to scrape the algae off her glass . Max , in a fit of despair , takes Alicia and runs off for two marvelous weeks in Burbank ( Fink calls it `` the most wonderful and lovely fourteen days in my whole life '' ) , at the end of which Alicia tragically contracts Parkinson's disease and dies . This brief resume hardly does the book justice , but I heartily recommend it to all those who are engages with the major problems of our time . Opera in the Grand Tradition , along with mah-jongg , seems to be staging a well-deserved comeback . In this country , the two guiding lights are , without doubt , Felix Fing and Anna Pulova . Fing , a lean , chiseled , impeccable gentleman of the old school who was once mistaken on the street for Sir Cedric Hardwicke , is responsible for the rediscovery of Verdi's earliest , most raucous opera , Nabisco , a sumptuous bout-de-souffle with a haunting leitmotiv that struck me as being highly reminiscent of the Mudugno version of `` Volare '' . Miss Pulova has a voice that Maria Callas once described as `` like chipping teeth with a screw driver '' , and her round , opalescent face becomes fascinatingly reflective of the emotions demanded by the role of Rosalie . The Champs Elysees is literally littered this summer with the prostrate bodies of France's beat-up beatnik jeunes filles . Cause of all this commotion : squat , pug-nosed , balding , hopelessly ugly Jean-Pierre Bravado , a Bogartian figure , who plays a sadistic , amoral , philosophic Tasti-Freeze salesman in old New-Waver Fredrico de Mille Rossilini's endlessly provocative film , A Sour Sponge . Bravado has been alternately described as `` a symbol of the new grandeur of France and myself '' ( De Gaulle ) and `` a decadent , disgusting slob '' ! ! ( Norman Mailer ) , but no one can deny that the screen crackles with electricity whenever he is on it . Soaring to stardom along with him , Margo Felicity Brighetti , a luscious and curvaceously beguiling Italian starlet , turns in a creditable performance as an airplane mechanic . The battle of the drib-drool continues , but most of New York's knowing sophisticates of Abstract Expressionism are stamping their feet impatiently in expectation of V ( for Vindication ) Day , September first , when Augustus Quasimodo's first one-man show opens at the Guggenheim . We have heard that after seeing Mr. Quasimodo's work it will be virtually impossible to deny the artistic validity and importance of the whole abstract movement . And it is thought by many who think about such things that Quasimodo is the logical culmination of a school that started with Monet , progressed through Kandinsky and the cubist Picasso , and blossomed just recently in Pollock and De Kooning . Quasimodo defines his own art as `` the search for what is not there '' . `` I paint the nothing '' , he said once to Franz Kline and myself , `` the nothing that is behind the something , the inexpressible , unpaintable ' tick ' in the unconscious , the ' spirit ' of the moment resting forever , suspended like a huge balloon , in non-time '' . It is his relentlessness and unwaivering adherence to this revolutionary artistic philosophy that has enabled him to paint such pictures as `` The Invasion of Cuba '' . In this work , his use of non-color is startling and skillful . The sweep of space , the delicate counterbalance of the white masses , the over-all completeness and unity , the originality and imagination , all entitle it to be called an authentic masterpiece . I asked Quasimodo recently how he accomplished this , and he replied that he had painted his model `` a beautiful shade of red and then had her breathe on the canvas '' , which was his typical tongue-in-cheek way of chiding me for my lack of sensitivity . Dear Sirs : Let me begin by clearing up any possible misconception in your minds , wherever you are . The collective by which I address you in the title above is neither patronizing nor jocose but an exact industrial term in use among professional thieves . It is , I am reliably given to understand , the technical argot for those who engage in your particular branch of the boost ; ; i.e. , burglars who rob while the tenants are absent , in contrast to hot-slough prowlers , those who work while the occupants are home . Since the latter obviously require an audacity you do not possess , you may perhaps suppose that I am taunting you as socially inferior . Far from it ; ; I merely draw an etymological distinction , hoping that specialists and busy people like you will welcome such precision in a layman . Above all , disabuse yourselves of any thought that I propose to vent moral indignation at your rifling my residence , to whimper over the loss of a few objets d'art , or to shame you into rectitude . My object , rather , is to alert you to an aspect or two of the affair that could have the gravest implications for you , far beyond the legal sanctions society might inflict . You have unwittingly set in motion forces so malign , so vindictive , that it would be downright inhumane of me not to warn you about them . Quite candidly , fellows , I wouldn't be in your shoes for all the rice in China . As you've doubtless forgotten the circumstances in the press of more recent depredations , permit me to recapitulate them briefly . Sometime on Saturday evening , August 22nd , while my family and I were dining at the Hostaria dell' Orso , in Rome , you jimmied a window of our home in Bucks County , Pennsylvania , and let yourselves into the premises . Hastening to the attic , the temperature of which was easily hotter than the Gold Coast , you proceeded to mask the windows with a fancy wool coverlet , some khaki pants , and the like , and to ransack the innumerable boxes and barrels stored there . What you were looking for ( unless you make a hobby of collecting old tennis rackets and fly screens ) eludes me , but to judge from phonograph records scattered about a fumed-oak Victrola . You danced two tangos and a paso doble , which must have been fairly enervating in that milieu . You then descended one story , glommed a television set from the music room -- the only constructive feature of your visit , by the way -- and , returning to the ground floor , entered the master bedroom . From the curio cabinet on its south wall and the bureaus beneath , you abstracted seventeen ivory , metal , wood , and stone sculptures of Oriental and African origin , two snuffboxes , and a jade-handled magnifying glass . Rummaging through a stack of drawers nearby , you unearthed an antique French chess set in ivory and sandalwood , which , along with two box Kodaks , you added to your haul . Then , having wrapped the lot in an afghan my dog customarily slept on , you lammed out the front door , considerately leaving it open for neighbors to discover . So much for the tiresome facts , as familiar to you , I'm sure , as to the constables and state troopers who followed in your wake . The foregoing , aided by several clues I'll withhold to keep you on your toes , will pursue you with a tenacity worthy of Inspector Javert , but before they close in , gird yourselves , I repeat , for a vengeance infinitely more pitiless . Fourteen of the sculptures you took possess properties of a most curious and terrifying nature , as you will observe when your limbs begin to wither and your hair falls out in patches . In time , these minor manifestations will multiply and effloresce , riddling you with frambesia , the king's evil , sheep rot , and clonic spasm , until your very existence becomes a burden and you cry out for release . All this , though , is simply a prelude , a curtain-raiser , for what ensues , and I doubt whether any Occidental could accurately forecast it . If , however , it would help to intensify your anguish , I can delimit the powers of a few of the divinities you've affronted and describe the punishment they meted out in one analogous instance . Hold on tight . First of all , the six figures of the Buddha you heisted -- four Siamese heads , a black obsidian statuette in the earth-touching position , and a large brass figure of the Dying Buddha on a teakwood base . Now , you probably share the widespread Western belief that the Lord Buddha is the most compassionate of the gods , much more so than Jehovah and Allah and the rest . 'fess up -- don't you ? ? Well , ordinarily he is , except ( as the Wheel of the Law specifies ) toward impious folk who steal , disturb , or maltreat the Presence . Very peculiar retribution indeed seems to overtake such jokers . Eight or ten years ago , a couple of French hoods stole a priceless Khmer head from the Musee Guimet , in Paris , and a week later crawled into the Salpetriere with unmistakable symptoms of leprosy . Hell's own amount of chaulmoogra oil did nothing to alleviate their torment ; ; they expired amid indescribable fantods , imploring the Blessed One to forgive their desecration . Any reputable French interne can supply you with a dozen similar instances , and I'll presently recount a case out of my own personal experience , but , for the moment , let's resume our catalogue . Whether the pair of Sudanese ivory carvings you lifted really possess the juju to turn your livers to lead , as a dealer in Khartoum assured me , I am not competent to say . Likewise the ivory Chinese female figure known as a `` doctor lady '' ( provenance Honan ) ; ; a friend of mine removing her from the curio cabinet for inspection was felled as if by a hammer , but he had previously drunk a quantity of applejack . The three Indian brass deities , though -- Ganessa , Siva , and Krishna -- are an altogether different cup of tea . They hail from Travancore , a state in the subcontinent where Kali , the goddess of death , is worshiped . Have you ever heard of Thuggee ? ? Nuf sed . But it is the wooden sculpture from Bali , the one representing two men with their heads bent backward and their bodies interlaced by a fish , that I particularly call to your attention . Oddly enough , this is an amulet against housebreakers , presented to the mem and me by a local rajah in 1949 . Inscribed around its base is a charm in Balinese , a dialect I take it you don't comprehend . Neither do I , but the Tjokorda Agoeng was good enough to translate , and I'll do as much for you . Whosoever violates our rooftree , the legend states , can expect maximal sorrow . The teeth will rain from his mouth like pebbles , his wife will make him cocu with fishmongers , and a trolley car will grow in his stomach . Furthermore -- and this , to me , strikes an especially warming note -- it shall avail the vandals naught to throw away or dispose of their loot . The cycle of disaster starts the moment they touch any belonging of ours , and dogs them unto the forty-fifth generation . Sort of remorseless , isn't it ? ? Still , there it is . Now , you no doubt regard the preceding as pap ; ; you're tooling around full of gage in your hot rods , gorging yourselves on pizza and playing pinball in the taverns and generally behaving like Ubermenschen . In that case , listen to what befell another wisenheimer who tangled with our joss . A couple of years back , I occupied a Village apartment whose outer staircase contained the type of niche called a `` coffin turn '' . In it was a stone Tibetan Buddha I had picked up in Bombay , and occasionally , to make merit , my wife and I garlanded it with flowers or laid a few pennies in its lap . After a while , we became aware that the money was disappearing as fast as we replenished it . Our suspicions eventually centered , by the process of elimination , on a grocer's boy , a thoroughly bad hat , who delivered cartons to the people overhead . The more I probed into this young man's activities and character , the less savory I found him . I learned , for example , that he made a practice of yapping at dogs he encountered and , in winter , of sprinkling salt on the icy pavement to scarify their feet . His energy was prodigious ; ; sometimes he would be up before dawn , clad as a garbage collector and hurling pails into areaways to exasperate us , and thereafter would hurry to the Bronx Zoo to grimace at the lions and press cigar butts against their paws . Evenings , he was frequently to be seen at restaurants like Enrico & Paglieri's or Peter's Backyard drunkenly donning ladies' hats and singing `` O Sole Mio '' . In short , and to borrow an arboreal phrase , slash timber . Well , the odious little toad went along chivying animals and humans who couldn't retaliate , and in due course , as was inevitable , overreached himself . One morning , we discovered not only that the pennies were missing from the idol but that a cigarette had been stubbed out in its lap . `` Now he's bought it '' , said my wife contentedly . `` No divinity will hold still for that . He's really asking for it '' . And how right she was . The next time we saw him , he was a changed person ; ; he had aged thirty years , and his face , the color of tallow , was crisscrossed with wrinkles , as though it had been wrapped in chicken wire . Some sort of nemesis was haunting his footsteps , he told us in a quavering voice -- either an ape specter or Abe Spector , a process-server , we couldn't determine which . His eyes had the same dreadful rigid stare as Dr. Grimesby Roylott's when he was found before his open safe wearing the speckled band . The grocery the youth worked for soon tired of his depressing effect on customers , most of whom were sufficiently neurotic without the threat of incubi , and let him go . The beautiful , the satisfying part of his disintegration , however , was the masterly way the Buddha polished him off . Reduced to beggary , he at last got a job as office boy to a television producer . His hubris , deficiency of taste , and sadism carried him straightaway to the top . He evolved programs that plumbed new depths of bathos and besmirched whole networks , and quickly superseded his boss . Not long ago , I rode down with him in an elevator in Radio City ; ; he was talking to himself thirteen to the dozen and smoking two cigars at once , clearly a man in extremis . `` See that guy '' ? ? The operator asked pityingly . `` I wouldn't be in his shoes for all the rice in China . There's some kind of a nemesis haunting his footsteps '' . However one looks at it , therefore , I'd say that your horoscope for this autumn is the reverse of rosy . The inventory you acquired from me isn't going to be easy to move ; ; you can't very well sidle up to people on the street and ask if they want to buy a hot Bodhisattva . Additionally , since you're going to be hors de combat pretty soon with sprue , yaws , Delhi boil , the Granville wilt , liver fluke , bilharziasis , and a host of other complications of the hex you've aroused , you mustn't expect to be lionized socially . My advice , if you live long enough to continue your vocation , is that the next time you're attracted by the exotic , pass it up -- it's nothing but a headache . As you can count on me to do the same . Compassionately yours , S. J. Perelman revulsion in the desert the doors of the D train slid shut , and as I dropped into a seat and , exhaling , looked up across the aisle , the whole aviary in my head burst into song . She was a living doll and no mistake -- the blue-black bang , the wide cheekbones , olive-flushed , that betrayed the Cherokee strain in her Midwestern lineage , and the mouth whose only fault , in the novelist's carping phrase , was that the lower lip was a trifle too voluptuous . From what I was able to gauge in a swift , greedy glance , the figure inside the coral-colored boucle dress was stupefying .